0
So knife crime's going to go up, because the evidence is there, Carla. Reduce stop-and-search, knife crime soars. 

1
Of course Gordon Brown's right to say there's a link. Michael, you know this better than we do. You know there's a link between poverty at home and underperformance in the classroom. It's that link which is holding back so many children. That's what's unfair. That link is the link that I want to help solve. We would do it partly through the tax proposals I've talked about earlier, giving people £700 back in their pocket by raising the income tax threshold to £10,000 so that people on ordinary incomes who aren't being helped at the moment are helped. And through our proposal, we call it - it's a slightly technocratic phrase - we call it a pupil premium. It basically means extra money, £2.5 billion. That would, for instance, allow our schools to reduce the average class size in an average primary school down to 20. I have three young children. Two of them go to a local school, at eight and five. I see myself as a father that what happens to a young child in a reception class, years one, two and three, is so important in developing their self-confidence, their social skills, their willingness to learn. Get it right at that early age, and we can really help people later in life. That's what I believe in.

2
You won't admit the truth, will you? The truth is there's nothing we can do.

3
I tell you how we pay for it. We would, for instance, stop the huge unfair loopholes that only benefit the very wealthy at the top of the tax system. At the moment, the top 10% earners in this country get twice as much tax subsidy from all of the rest of you when they make contributions to their pension pot than everybody else. We say give people tax relief on their pension contributions, but make sure that they are the same and use that money so that no-one pays any income tax on the first £10,000 they earn.

4
You just, look, there's no point in speculating about that at the moment, cos we're a long way off taking the decision.

5
I'm just talking numbers. We haven't even mentioned housing yet. Oh, no, I ignore that nonsense. Complete nonsense. I'm just talking pure facts. Housing. We have to build one new home every two minutes just to cope with legal net migration under this Conservative government. It is literally impossible. And as for the numbers coming in, I would respond to this. 50% of the three quarters of a million who are coming in a year are dependents. They're not wealth creators. And mass migration is making us poorer. You'll hear, oh, GDP's going up. Well, of course it is. There are more people. GDP per capita, our relative wealth, has declined for the last six consecutive quarters.

6
We need strong big business in this country. We do, and one thing, can I just come in on that David? Yes, yes. But one thing I think business needs, and again this is a difference of view, I think we need to stay within the European Union. Because I think it would be a disaster for our businesses. I mean, give David Cameron credit, he believes in us staying in the EU, but I'm afraid he's being dragged by his party to exit from the EU. Now again, I've got to say to this audience, I've got to say to this audience, I think that would be a real problem for our country.

7
have to spend money wisely. Folks, I've explained to you, we've massively increased over the last few years the percentage of the national cake we put into the NHS for a worse return. Does nobody else acknowledge we need to spend the money better?

8
Let me perhaps draw out one of them. David Cameron keeps repeating we've got nothing to say. We're the only party, actually, in this general election campaign who've got a plan fully costed to get people off benefits and into work. That's been independently recognised. I think it's a general... It's almost a philosophical issue here. Do you think the best way to help people who are vulnerable or poor is to constantly giving them more benefits through greater dependency on the state? Or do you provide incentives to let them help themselves where they can? That is what our very, very radical tax switch, so you keep more money when you start working, would precisely do - it would get people off that benefits dependency into work. I think that's what most people agree is the absolute priority these days.

9
Well, we won't be able to do anything unless we win the election. We've obviously only been in opposition so far. I have been frustrated, if I'm honest, that these strikes have gone on as long as they have gone on. The strikes are very bad for patients. People are very anxious about the strikes. I don't think doctors want to be on strike. As I said earlier, my wife works in one of the big London hospitals, so I know first-hand and relayed every night, pressure that NHS staff are under. It's been unrelenting during Covid, unrelenting now because of waiting lists. So what we would do is instead of arguing about who gets in the room first to negotiate with the doctors, we would roll up our sleeves in a grown-up way, get in the room and settle this dispute so that patients can get the care they need. Doctors can get back to work, and the country can move forward, because we can't go on like this anymore. And the sooner we have a bit of grown-up politics in this, the better, I think, because we absolutely need to move forward as a country.

10
So Scotland has a migration problem. The problem is we don't have enough migrants because Scotland has a declining working age population. So we need people to come. And you know what? I am genuinely fed up going to speak to businesses. going to speak to health care workers, going to speak to people in our social care sector, in our schools and beyond, who say that they need more colleagues. Businesses who want to expand, who need people to come and work with them and for them. That's why I'm in favour of migration. And this race to the right that is happening in Westminster is so, so wrong. We can do better. We must demand better, not just from the Tories, but from the Labour Party too. And the SNP will always do that.

11
The reality is the SNP can't do just the same as Tory does. On the point of the anti-austerity motion that Ed Miliband talks about...

12
I believe in making a success of Brexit.

13
Thank you, Julie, and everyone watching tonight. Firstly, I want to express my condolences to everyone affected by Friday's attack. This atrocity should give us all pause for thought. None of us yet know the full details, so politicians should avoid knee-jerk responses. But we do know that our justice system has been hollowed out. Violent crime is up. Our prison's in crisis. Our police overstretched. Listen to nurses and they'll say the same about our National Health Service. Teachers the same about our schools. Deep cuts to vital public services. The fabric of our communities. Happened at the same time the government made huge tax giveaways to the richest few and to big business. Labour will make very different choices. We will be on your side, rebuilding our country for the many, not the few.

14
What happened was completely wrong and the Prime Minister has rightly apologised for that, apologised to veterans but also to all of us because he was representing all of us. I'm from Portsmouth, I've also been Defence Secretary and my wish at the end of this week is that all of our veterans feel completely treasured. And I'm hoping tonight to convince you of some things that are important to them, important to their legacy. And I couldn't do that if I wasn't straight with you on that issue.

15
I would like to see a levelling upwards when it comes to fairness, because what I'm deeply worried about is the kinds of rules, for example, that will break up families, that will end up in things like immigration detention, that has things like a minimum income rule. I think all of those are deeply unfair. Family reunion ought to be supported, so we need fair immigration rules.

16
No, I voted for remain. I wanted to remain, but now we've left and there's no going back. But... Sorry? No, I'm not. No, that is not our policy. Never has been our policy. I voted for remain, but we voted to leave. We're out. I accept that. We're not going back. Do you not see here... But we do need... We've got a very botched deal. If you talk to any business that's trying to trade, they will tell you it's not good enough. I think we can do more on defence and security, by the way, with our European partners. But we're not going back in. We're not going back into the single market, the customs union, and we're not going back to freedom of movement. That is very, very clear and set out in our manifesto, because we did have a referendum, it split us down the middle, and we do not want to go through that again. But you can see why.

17
Tell me how you're going to balance the books.

18
But you said that you had a point about the policy. I'm just telling you, I disagree with you. 15 other European countries just a few weeks ago decided that they agree with me. Did the Supreme Court call it unlawful? Well, I've been crystal clear, and that's why we've passed a new piece of legislation to address the concerns of our court, because I respect our court. They raised concerns, that's why we passed a new piece of legislation, and that's why their flights will now go if I'm Prime Minister. And when it comes to the ECHR, I am crystal clear. I believe everything that we are doing is in compliance with our international obligations, but if a foreign court, including the European Court, forces me to choose between our country's national security and membership of that court, I'm going to choose this country's national security every single time.

19
And there'd be more refugees then, yeah?

20
Greens holding you to account on that in the Parliament. Doing a good job.

21
You voted for the Bedroom Tax nine times, are you proud about that as well?

22
No, no, no. What I do think we need to do is we've got to provide more council housing and more social housing, but to restore people's trust, I think it has to be done by local councils and it must be for local people.

23
I want to thank you for watching tonight. A vote for Labour is a vote for hope. We are the party that created our NHS, introduced the minimum wage and will end NHS privatisation, introduce a living wage of at least £10 an hour and end the scandalous crisis in social care that leaves 1.5 million older people without the care they need. A Labour government will support you and invest in your community. We are on your side. Let's bring real change to our country so that it works for the many, not the few. Vote Labour on the 12th of December.

24
You've just admitted, if the population's growing by 2.5 million people in the last three years alone, you haven't got a labour shortage. You've got to make work pay, you've got to train your own people. We haven't got a people shortage. There's no labour shortage. Does anyone else agree there's no labour shortage? We haven't got a people shortage, but too many people, work doesn't pay.

25
Plaid Cymru want to build 10,000 new affordable houses over the next 10 years. But we also want to make owning and running a household more affordable. So we want to create a Welsh energy company, Ynni Cymru, that will allow us to use Welsh natural resources to bring down the cost of energy for families and houses across Wales. We want to scrap the cruel and unnecessary bedroom tax. And we want to scrap letting agency fees so that it's cheaper to rent.

26
But, Nick, The Institute of Fiscal Studies that you were quoting a few minutes ago says that your proposals for financing your tax cuts are highly speculative, they don't know how you'e going to get the money. That's what they say about your proposals. They're not thought out, you're too big a risk on the economy, just like David is. We are trying to get people back to work in difficult situations, low inflation, low interest rates, get the economy moving, don't take money and shrink the economy now. That's the way to get people back to work.

27
Well, the truth is that trust has absolutely collapsed in politicians, because people are sick and tired of politicians promising things and then not delivering. And we saw that with Labour Party manifestos. We saw it with the referendum, of course, when the £9 million Conservative government leaflet promised to carry out the will of the people, and it's not yet been done. We have to get it done, and after that, trust can start to be rebuilt.

28
Well, Carly, politics is about choices. So inevitably, people will have differing views. And the electors decide who they want to carry out that policy for the next four or five years. But I did in a previous question talk about the National Health Service. There are areas where it seems everybody wants the same thing. And when it comes to resolving the care crisis, when it comes to the National Health Service being free at the point of delivery, there is actually quite broad agreement across all the parties. So there should be areas in which parties can work together. Whilst everybody here agrees on climate change, I've got a slight issue with that, in that what we're doing is putting a lot of people out of work and making the poor give lots of money to the rich. Yes, we want a cleaner planet, but I don't think the way we're currently doing it is right. So there'll always be disagreement.

29
Well it's possibly the question that is uppermost in everybody's mind right now and of course all of our thoughts remain with those affected by that horrific and cowardly attack in the centre of London on Saturday night and of course with the people of Manchester as well. This is one of the greatest responsibilities for any politician. and I think the first thing politicians need to do is be honest. There are no easy answers and often the knee-jerk responses are the wrong ones. Firstly, we've got to tackle and address and challenge extremism wherever we find it. And I believe very strongly that we have to do that with the Muslim community. We mustn't scapegoat the Muslim community, because it's wrong. Most Muslims are as appalled at these attacks as the rest of us. But it would also be counterproductive. because we're going to find it easier to root out extremism if we're working in partnership with that community. Secondly, we've got to make sure we invest in our security and intelligence services, and we've got to make sure we invest in our police. Obviously, one of the big issues of debate today has been the reduction in police numbers in England, 20,000 fewer police officers. In Scotland, we've maintained police numbers and we've increased the numbers of police officers who are trained to bear firearms. So after the Manchester attack, Police Scotland was able to have an increased level of policing from within its own resources without calling on the military, although we're very grateful for the offer of help from the military. So these are the things we've got to do. Two final points I would make are these. I've made one of them already about not scapegoating particular communities. But secondly, we must make sure that in our determination, and all of us share it to keep the population safe, we don't start to undermine our own freedoms and civil liberties, because these are part of what makes us who we are.

30
Well, absolutely right. The gentleman has got it nailed on the head. I mean, north of England is the most disenfranchised part of the United Kingdom. Look, I want Scotland to be independent. I'm not here to advocate for Yorkshire independence. I'll leave you to do that if you wish. But look, I absolutely see the benefit that Scotland has had, even with the limited powers of devolution that we have. So yes, of course, the people of northern England, I think, have been the most disenfranchised. I just want to touch upon one or two things that were said by Katrina, and I think the question was exceptionally important. We're believers in a proportional system. In Scotland we have a hybrid proportional system which works well in the Scottish Parliament. It's designed not to have a majority. There's only been one majority in the history of devolution and that's because we literally broke the system. But it's never been, it's not designed for a majority and it forces the SNP, who's the government at the moment, to work with other parties to find a compromise. So we definitely would support that. Also support, I should say, the abolition of the House of Lords. We've never taken a peerage, never ever will.

31
Charlotte, you're right. We've got to live within our means as a country. And that's why under my plan, we'll cut the deficit every year and we'll balance the books. But we'll do it a different way from David Cameron. And I reject his plan to double the spending cuts next year, because I think for you and so many people in this audience who rely on our NHS, that would be a disaster. So here's our plan. Our plan is to have fair taxes, to reverse David Cameron's tax cut for millionaires, which has given every millionaire in Britain £43,000 a year. It's to clamp down on that tax avoidance and raise seven and a half billion pounds a year. It's to protect education and health. But outside some key areas like that, to see spending fall. And it's also about something else. Because by raising living standards of working people in this country, we can get more tax revenues in, and we can get the deficit down. It's a fair plan. It's a better plan. A better plan from David Cameron's carrying on as he is.

32
Yes.

33
Look, what I'm being really clear to people about is that I want to make sure we maximise the Liberal Democrat number of MPs. We're basically going to beat lots of Conservative MPs, I hope, a few in Scotland, a few SNP MPs, but I'm determined to focus in on that. I've been in politics... OK, so that's not a question you're going to answer, just to be clear. Well, I'll explain why, Fiona. I've been in politics a little while. I've seen a lot of Lib Dem leaders. And sometimes they focus on what happens after the election. And I've noticed that when they do that, they don't focus on the job in hand, which is trying to win local champions and Liberal Democrats across the country. And I'm going to try and do that.

34
And we have, not they do have problems, but what they don't have are the alternative systems for people to make use of. All the indications show that the public will use public transport, if it's reliable, if it's affordable, and if it's safe. There wasn't adequate alternative methods of transportation in both those cities at the time. The ground work could not be done. Contrast and compare.

35
No, and look, his sums don't add up. But what I would say to Charlotte and the audience here, and indeed at home, is you've got to make a judgment about two things in this debate, balance and fairness. Look, I think there's some people on the stage who'll say there don't have to be any cuts at all. There'll be some people like Nigel who wants to follow David Cameron's extreme plan to double the cuts next year, which I think will be a disaster for our public services. And then this question of fairness. Look, Nigel actually wants to cut the top rate of income tax even further for the highest earners in our country, another £43,000 tax cut. Now, I just have a different view about the way a country succeeds. I think this idea that you just help the rich and powerful and the wealth will trickle down to everyone else is not the answer. You put working people first. So think about these two things as you cast your vote and make your decision. Balance and fairness. I believe ours is a balanced plan and a fair plan. 

36
Yes, inflation is... Of course, of course, I know things are not... I know things are not easy. Of course I know that. They've been difficult for a while for all sorts of reasons.

37
The first thing we've got to do is...

38
So imagine your mum has a fall, and then imagine those one in four people in our National Health Service who are from overseas aren't there anymore. And you remember that the people who are working in this country from other countries are hard-working, caring and decent, just like the rest of us. Are there pressures caused by immigration? Yes, there are. Should they be tackled by politicians providing the infrastructure? Yes, of course, they must be. But this is about what kind of a country we are. Setting false low targets, as Theresa May has done, as Paul Nuttall endorses, doesn't put Britain first. It's about appeasing the farages of this world rather than doing what is right by British business, by British health service, by British farmers, by the British economy.

39
My advice to you, Caroline, and certainly to Jeremy Corbyn if he was here, is don't make promises. Don't make promises you can't keep. And the reason I kept my promise...

40
I'm afraid to say I think the responsibility for a British government at this stage, two years after the event, with the loss of life we've suffered, with the amount of innocent civilians in Iraq, that we have been...

41
No, no, no. I'll give you the example of this. I'm a very keen footballer. I still play at my age. And a few years ago, I damaged my knee. My meniscus got torn. Really, really painful. Stopped me playing. I went to the NHS. They put me on a waiting list like everybody else. And I waited my turn and had it fixed. And I'm back playing football. I'm very grateful for that. I do just... So I didn't say if one of my children was going to die. What I would say about acute care, because, I mean, you all know this, If you're dealing with acute care, my mum was very, very ill all of her life. I spent a lot of my teenage years in high dependency units with my mum on nights we thought we were going to lose her because she was so ill. It absolutely seared on me what the NHS did for my mum. I know, and everybody knows, that for acute cases, life-threatening cases, the NHS is the very best place to be. So much so that private hospitals, in fact, refer into the NHS at that point because the NHS has got the expertise and the facility. So no, I wouldn't say to the rest of the population, you can be on a waiting list, give me time to fix it, but I'm going to speed myself through. I'm not going to look people in the eye and say, that's not me. If a family member was in an acute, life-threatening situation, I would want them in the NHS. because I know, from personal experience, the NHS is absolutely the best place to be if there's a life-threatening situation. That is my genuine view on this.

42
I think the honest answer is that we've had a very tough time as a party in the last couple of years. And as a consequence of all of those difficulties, I'm here to lead the Scottish National Party.

43
Well, Shirley, I'm really grateful for your service in the NHS too and I suspect, like you, my approach to the NHS is personal rather than political. I think about my mum's own journey through ovarian cancer, from the diagnosis to the treatment. to the care, to her passing away on a hospital ward just two floors away from the one where she'd given birth to me all those years previously. I think of the young woman in Kendal who came to see me last week, 19 years of age, eating disorder, told that she could not get treatment because she was not yet sick enough. Are the people who work in our NHS the best in the world? Absolutely. Is our NHS the best funded in the world? Don't kid yourself. It is time politicians were honest with the British people that there needs to be more money and that if there's going to be more money we will all have to pay for it. That is why the Liberal Democrats will put one penny on income tax to raise £30 billion over a parliament to invest in our national health and social care service so you get the treatment you deserve from cradle to grave.

44
No, they weren't wrong in what they reported at the time, they were absolutely right. But later it transpired that

45
Well, I would love to do that job. But if it does happen, then the democratic mandate is there.

46
I'm looking at Janet's response. When all the Prime Minister can say to her is that what the position is in Wales, Janet, I don't know. You may not be interested in the position in Wales. You may be interested in the position that you're facing and want a Prime Minister who takes responsibility for what he is responsible for. But what you'll get with the Prime Minister is somebody who makes a promise saying, I will be held personally responsible for bringing those waiting lists down. At the moment, they don't come down. What does he do? He blames everybody else. It's a personal responsibility, actually.

47
We can say sorry all you want. See if these guys made a mistake nine times in their career.

48
Well, of course, you're predicting the future that Scotland's going to be independent. And I very much hope that's the case. And there's very many Eastern European nations which have joined the European Union whilst having a debt ratio and a deficit ratio, sorry, which is higher than that which is currently in place, as long as they have a plan in place to bring it down. And we would most certainly have a plan in place to bring it down. But we are the most pro-European party in Parliament, and we will stand true to our values.

49
What happened? Well, we abolished the fees. You don't pay for tuition in Scotland. And what happens now? And what happens now is that the rate of application from Scots... Hang on, hang on. What happens financially now?

50
Just don't call us a loony party because that's offensive language actually.

51
Yes. I didn't see it. But I had the Attorney General's advice, and the Attorney General, made it absolutely clear that provided that we could show that there were breaches of the United Nations resolutions.

52
Well it was important to me that given the seriousness and the sensitivity of the matters at hand, that they were dealt with properly. And that's what I've done. We had an independent internal inquiry into what happened, have taken action and suspended the candidates involved, and I've been crystal clear that they should face the full consequences of the law. But Keir Starmer talks about leadership in politics. That's what Sue's question was about. It was a broad question about how to do that. I also think leadership means being straight with people. It means having the courage of your convictions, not changing your mind on every single position that you've taken, and being upfront about what you want to do for the country. That's not what Keir Starmer is doing. He's not being honest with everyone about his plans to raise their taxes. I think that will erode trust in politics. And that's the choice at this election.

53
No, you wanted a programme, Olsen, within two weeks where we couldn't debate the motion, which is not usual process.

54
vote SNP MPs in and we will support any party that looks to abolish the House of Lords. You may not have all your voters here. I promise you that. Just finish that one point please. Let me just make one point, it's exceptionally important that voting is absolutely one part, one way that you can take part in the democratic process. Can I say I'm really proud in the party to have somebody like Mary Black, the youngest ever MP in the House of Commons. Don't just use your vote, get involved, get yourself elected and sit down in Westminster because you can make a difference too.

55
We have been speaking to experts, many experts, who've proposed a wide range of different ways in which you can ask the very richest in society, people with wealth of 10 million or more, to pay modestly more. We're talking about 1% on assets over 10 million. But if you did that, you could raise tens of billions by the end of this next parliament.

56
Yeah, but sometimes, Anoushka, some of the questions are a bit more complicated than yes and no. I think we all know that. So you would if he was president? Listen, America is one of our closest allies, and you have to respect whoever they elect.

57
This is a UK government and a UK government policy.

58
I haven't seen his numbers. I can tell you my numbers. But I can give you a...

59
Gordon Brown is trying to make you believe he can protect health spending, he can protect education spending, he can protect police spending. He cannot do any of these things because he's given this country the biggest budget deficit of any developed country in the world. I'm going to stop it there.

60
There are no plans whatsoever to disband MI5 or any other part of the security services. There are plans to invest properly in our police and security services. And when you live and represent an area like mine, where somebody was murdered on the streets by a far-right terrorist attack on an individual, you realise how horrific that is for the community and how dangerous that is for all of us. Yes, we do need to invest in all of our services, and that will help to make us all a lot safer.

61
And here's our NHS, is what he would say. Oh, nonsense.

62
Nobody can guarantee the real-terms per-pupil funding increase. In the Labour Party's manifesto we know the figures don't add up. What is important is that as we look What we need to do is to ensure we will put those record levels of funding into schools. We need to ensure that we get that better spread of funding in terms of the fair funding formula. But I also say this, if you look at what happens in education, it's not just people are focusing on funding, but actually we need to ensure that we do see good or outstanding schools and more good or outstanding places in good or outstanding schools for children. We've seen the number increase over the last seven years. We need to carry on doing that so that there is a good school place for every child. And that isn't just about funding, it's about a whole variety of things that go to make up really good education for children.

63
Well, of course, in Scotland, it's the SNP that has seen the building as oversaw the building of 40% more affordable homes than in England and 70% more affordable homes in Wales. I don't necessarily think that's a tough question to answer. What we are looking at is the future and ultimately the Conservatives. have decided to cut the capital budget for Scotland, which impacts directly upon our ability to build more homes. But for the people who are living within those homes, what we've done in Scotland is introduced the Scottish Child Payment. It doesn't exist anywhere else on these isles. The Labour Party won't replicate it, the Tories certainly won't. 100,000 children are going to be lifted out of poverty thanks to that Scottish Child Payment. It is being called a game-changer. Will the Labour Party back it? Yes or no?

64
Sure. Alicia. Alicia. Alicia. It's about leadership, Alicia. It's about leadership and what I want to achieve as Prime Minister. When I look at the country, what do I think the biggest problems in the country are? I think five years of wages falling behind bills and the threat it's going to happen again. I think five years of young people thinking they're going to have a worse life than their parents. And five years of an NHS in crisis. And if I'm Prime Minister, in seven or eight days' time, I want to spend all of my energies on those issues, not on deciding whether we want to exit the European Union, which I think, frankly, would be a disaster for the country and would set us back. But supposing she wants a voice vote?

65
All I would say is this argument, I think, just doesn't address the fundamental issue. There are going to be big things over the next few years, and neither of them will come clean on this with you, that we simply can't afford to do. Trident. I don't think we can afford it. A tax on banks I think is now unavoidable. Tax credits. We need to look at public sector pensions. These are big decisions which we need to take. And I would like us for once to get politicians together.

66
I think it's absolutely vital. I think it's absolutely vital, and I think that the issue of trust in politics is central to this election and fundamental to the corrosion of trust in politics at the moment. So why do you think you're being asked that question? Let's be clear. It's the failure of politicians to deliver Brexit. Because the people of the EU... Hang on. Hang on a minute.

67
Well, I'm going to try and change... Let me see if I can change your mind. Look, look, I think that the thing that's happening in Britain at the moment is it's the very richest in our society. And I'm talking about the top 1% people earning over £150,000 a year who are doing sort of OK. And I think lots and lots of people, including on middle incomes, are finding life really tough. Now, the question is how we do something about it. And I hope you'll get a different message from me tonight if that's the message you've been getting from me. Let me give you an example. Tuition fees. Some people have criticised me for wanting to lower the burden of tuition fees from £9,000 to £6,000 because they say it'll help middle-class families. Well, too right I want to help middle-class families. Because I think lots of families are saying, if my son or daughter is leaving university with £44,000 of debt, that isn't a good situation, let's do something about it with fair changes. So, look, I want a country where you feel you're not struggling, you can get on, and that's one of the changes we'd make.

68
No, no, if you look at the sum total of the time that I've been Prime Minister, because you've picked one particular period, if you look at the sum total of the time that I've been Prime Minister, the numbers are down.

69
So the way to deal with this is to make sure that there are safe and legal routes set up where necessary and I've mentioned some of the examples before like the Afghan scheme and the Syrian scheme. What we can't have is people illegally entering the country by small boat From a safe place, France is a safe country, nobody has to leave France to flee danger. The people coming across on small boats are overwhelmingly young, single men. We should be prioritising people who are in genuine need. The people that came from Syria, for example, very often they were women and children and people who needed support. So we cannot have this small boat traffic continuing. And that is why the Rwanda scheme is so important. It acts as a deterrent. Richard, in case you haven't noticed, the Rwanda scheme has actually not started yet. Well, it's a very good question, so there's a couple of... The Home Office hasn't... Well, I'll give you the answer. I'll give you the answer. So, the Australians tried something similar about ten years ago. They called it Operation Sovereign Borders. They completely stopped what they called their illegal maritime arrivals. That's because they had a pick-up policy, they had a push-back policy. Using removals to, in that case, Nauru. But secondly, we set up a returns agreement with Albania about a year and a half ago, and that saw... A 94% reduction in Albanians crossing the English Channel because they knew if they came across there'd be a return. So there are two very clear case studies showing you how a return scheme or removal scheme acts as a deterrent. It'll end these dangerous and illegal and unnecessary crossings, giving us capacity to focus our attention on those people who are genuinely in need.

70
Yeah, I mean, I'm going to just be frank on this, and it may not always be popular. Firstly, I don't believe EU nationals should lose rights that they've got. I think the way in which EU nationals who've made a massive contribution to this country have been treated since Brexit has been absolutely shameful. But I do think we should make it more possible to attract talent from non-EU countries. As you know, I'm the First Minister of Scotland. If you look ahead for 25 years, all of the growth in Scotland's population is projected to come from inward migration. If we make it harder, then the risk is our population will fall and that will have a negative impact on our economy. I also hate the tone of the debate around immigration, the hostile environment demonising immigrants. Imagine if British citizens living in other countries were talked about and treated in the way that immigrants here are sometimes talked about. It's shameful, it's wrong and we need to change it for hard economic reasons as well as for bigger value-based reasons.

71
I think it's also important to recognise the biodiversity crisis in our oceans as well and off our own coasts. We would want to ban fossil fuel licences for exploration, for instance in Cardigan Bay, and also see the UK signing the UN Global Ocean Treaty, which seeks to create a network of ocean sanctuaries across the whole of the Earth, which will be worth 30% of our oceans.

72
Well I want the parties to work together and when I became Prime Minister I invited one or two liberals to do things like Shirley Williams to do things for the government. I invited people who are businessmen and women to come into the government and work with us for national economic benefit and I will continue to ask people to give their talents to public service and that is something that's really important to do. But there is this fundamental position about this year and I think we've got to resolve this. I've had to take the economy through the most difficult global financial crisis. We made the right decisions to take ownership of the banks and the right decisions to get the world together to deal with that recession. Every time we've said we have to support the economy through difficult times. Now, what David's saying is even when it's fragile, he wants for ideological reasons, I think, to take six billion pounds out of the economy. That puts thousands of jobs, teachers, It puts policemen, it puts thousands of jobs at risk immediately. And that's why they're talking about an emergency budget in June. David, you're a risk to the economy. Nick's a risk to our security with his nuclear weapons policy. You're a risk to the economy.

73
Exactly right. Let's think about one group of people. There are 800,000 people over the age of 65 in Britain at the moment. who need social care who aren't getting it. Those are people who need help getting out of bed in the morning, people who need help to feed themselves, need help bathing, need help to live a basically decent civilised life. They're not getting that help. And what the Green Party is saying, we have to provide that help and at the same time ensure that the NHS is providing the services we need. We want to create 400,000 new jobs in social care in the NHS. Those are jobs, I don't know what your plans in life are, Charlotte, but perhaps one of those jobs might be yours. And those are jobs that ensure that the most vulnerable in our society are being looked after, are being cared for. And of course, the people who get those jobs will also be paying tax and national insurance and have some money to spend in their local communities.

74
There's a cap on the welfare bill which the government has put in place, we're going to keep to within that cap.

75
No, I don't have a particular figure in mind. We do say that it would be lower, it would be 40% under a Conservative government after a period of time as compared to 42% under Labour. and you've always got to balance the need for proper public services with the need for a low-tax economy which will encourage people to use their hard work, their skills, their energy, their enterprise to the full. And it's a balanced judgment that you have to make at each budget every year. Okay.

76
I've been talking with Nigel about our plans for months and we've been doing well but we want to put turbo boosters, rocket boosters onto our campaign and that's what we've done. I'm delighted that Nigel's agreed both to stand, to lead the party and off we go. We're a successful team. In 2019 we won a national election with Mia's chair, with Nigel a leader. I'm delighted that Nigel's getting stuck... Not at all. Look, we had 1,000 people in a constituency where Nigel's standing today in Clacton for his campaign launch. We're off.

77
I don't know about you, but I thought all of that sounded slightly desperate. It sounded like an attempt to frighten people, instead of doing what I think we need to do in our country, which is to take and make a clean break from the last 13 years, to have new leadership to take the country forward, to solve the problems that we have. And I think that the Conservatives are best placed to offer that, because if you vote Conservative, you know you can get fresh, new leadership from a new team on May the 7th, rather than being stuck with what we have now. You've heard in the debate today some big differences set out between us about how we believe you've got to give more priority to keeping our country safe, keeping our borders secure, making sure we keep our defences strong. But also you've heard a lot of differences on values, how the family comes first for me, how we need to do more to help those who actually do the right thing and want their government behind them. We do face some difficult times in this country, but I still think we have incredible days ahead of us. We're a great country in so many different ways, with the right leadership, with the right values, with a clean break from these 13 years of failure. We can achieve anything if we all pull together and build the big society that we all know we need to make our country a better place to live in.

78
And by doing help to buy and abolishing stamp duty, we will massively be able to speed up how quickly you can get on the housing ladder and fulfill that dream of owning your own home. I think it's incredibly important. And as I said, I don't want to give you waffle, two very specific things, help to buy, abolish stamp duty, neither backed by Keir Starmer and the Labour Party. So again, there's a very clear choice for you. Because if he's your prime minister, stamp duty for first-time buyers is going up. Right, that's what the plans are. If he's your Prime Minister, stamp duty...

79
Charles Kennedy.

80
These two constantly argue about waste, as if we can fill the black hole in the public finances by saving money on paper clips and pot plants in Whitehall. Of course we can get rid of a bit of waste, but that doesn't really address the big questions we need to ask ourselves. And I think we need to be clear with you, open with you, straight with you, We've tried to do that. We set out £15 billion worth of savings. I've listed some of them. We have one specific tax that we want to introduce to help fill the black hole. We would impose a 10% tax on the profits of the banks. These banks who got us into the trouble in the first place, I think they should pay you back because you, the taxpayer, have bailed them out and use that money to deal with the black hole in the finances. But let's not get obsessed about mythical savings in waste. which is the oldest trick in the book to pretend that you can square a circle like that, or get obsessed about when you deliver these cuts. The crucial thing is, are we going to be open with people, with you, about how we're going to save money in the long term?

81
Thank you. Let me bring in... I think this goes to the heart of the problem, because I think we should just keep political dogma out of the public sector and public services. The public... We're all politicians up here, but most of the public don't care what colour the cat is. They just want some mice caught. That's what they want. They want results. And in my experience, listening to people who are actually doing these jobs, police officers who have reduced crime by half, over the time we've been in office. Healthcare professionals who are coming up with amazing initiatives in our hospitals and in our GP surgeries. Teachers who are responsible. We now have 90% of our schools are good or outstanding. Listen to the professionals in these services. Keep political dogma out of it.

82
Countries that have brought in a wealth tax, like, for example, Switzerland and Spain, have done so very effectively. And it makes a big difference if we're going to put in this investment that we need. We're the only party that's being honest in this election.

83
What happened in Manchester was unbelievably abominable in every way. Innocent lives were taken of mainly young women out enjoying themselves. I want to live in a country that protects the right of people to go out and enjoy themselves at any town or any city in this country. The consequences of that are appalling for those families, and I hope those that are perpetrated this act are all discovered and brought to book. But there's also a question we have to ask about the number of police officers. Under Amber Rudd's time in the Home Secretary and Theresa May before that, 20,000 police officers have lost their jobs. There are fewer police officers around than there were seven years ago, and those cuts are going to continue. I think it's important that we restore that. What I also think, if I may say so, is the point that Angus was alluding to about terror threats and other threats to our security. There are terrorist threats, obviously. There are also cyber attacks threats, as the National Health Service discovered. It's also important that we recognize that leaving large spaces of, for example, Libya, ungoverned, leaves an opportunity for those who wish to do harm to an awful lot of people, a space in which to develop to do that harm. If you intervene somewhere, the consequences go on for a very long time.

84
Thank you. Well, thank you for your question. The NHS in particular, it's an act of faith for the people of this country. They want to be able to rely on it. But since the COVID pandemic, the caseload that our healthcare professionals are dealing with has gone up by 43%. The only way that we can reduce those waiting lists is to keep the NHS budget strong. That we have done, that we will continue to do. The only party on this platform that has ever cut the NHS budget is Labour. they've got it three times in Wales and we have to increase the number of healthcare professionals that we have. We have been doing that, 70,000 more nurses for example, we have to continue that and we won't do if we can't retain them in the service because they're being taxed out of it because of their pension.

85
Well, misogyny, racism, discrimination has absolutely no place in our society, but particularly when it comes to the police, because they're people that we look to to protect us and trust. And all the things that we've seen and read about over the past year or two have been really appalling and shocked us to a core, because we thought, hang on, the people that we put our trust in There are a small minority, and we shouldn't tar the entire police force with the actions of a small minority, but a small minority of people who were behaving in a way that was completely reprehensible.

86
We are one of the only parties here, I think, who want to cancel HS2. And it's the opportunity cost of investing in such a big project when we could be investing in the local sustainable transport that people are crying out for. People are trapped in their cars. They want better buses. They want better local transport. They want to be able to walk and cycle. And that's where we differ on HS2. We like Eurostar. We like high speed rail. But that project at this moment, we could spend that money so much better in other places.

87
I just want to be very direct. We have taken some people from Syria, some of the most vulnerable people, including elderly and disabled people. But the most important thing we can do in Syria is maintain the fact that we are one of the biggest, I think the second largest, bilateral aid donor helping people in those refugee camps to be fed, to be housed, to be clothed, and try to find a solution so they can go home. There are about six million people or in danger of being refugees, we cannot take all those people in. So it makes sense to use our aid budget to try and help them in the region and then help them get home.

88
We need to put... We need to put money and resource into Grimsby. We need resource decision-making to come. So we have to be bold enough in government to release that so that there's more power here in Grimsby. They're difficult things to do. Governments haven't done that in the past, but we have to do that. Some of it we can do straightaway. The potholes that are driving everyone mad because their cars get damaged, it costs them hundreds of pounds, and if you need your car or your van for work, it's a complete nightmare because you can't actually use it. That can be done straightaway. We've been setting out our plans on that. Childcare came up this morning in a discussion I was having. We want to create 100,000 new places for childcare. This is at 3,000 nurseries around schools, because I think primary schools are the best place for nurseries. So that means children get the opportunity to develop the skills that they need before reception year, which isn't happening in the way it should at the moment, in my view. But also, parents and carers can go back into work, which many of them want to do, and that then helps the local economy. There are things that we can do. It goes back to my point. We've got first steps, the things we want to do, the day we get into government. If we're elected in, that I want to start, and I've said to my Shadow Cabinet, I want you to prepare months ago for the first day in government. I don't want you picking up the phone on day one. I want to know you're ready. And that's why I'm so confident that we can do this as soon as we get the chance, if we do get a chance, to bring about the change this country so desperately needs.

89
I'm not going to have a European army. But let me explain. I think I've said that a number of times. Look, let me explain the point about Europe, because Nigel raises it. Think about the problems that we have in the world. Think about the issue of Russia, where we need sanctions to remain in place and, if necessary, to be stepped up. It's Europe and America working together. Think about the battle against ISIS. Look, ISIS is a disgusting, evil organization, and we must give them no quarter and defeat them at home and abroad. But we've got to do it by cooperating across borders, and this is this fundamental point for us as a country. We've got to learn the lessons of the past. We can't have Britain thinking it can solve the problems of the world on its own with the United States. That is the lesson of the 2003 Iraq war. But at the same time, we can't withdraw from the world, because otherwise those problems will visit us here at home.

90
Well, Julie, first of all, thank you for doing what you do. My mum was also a small business owner. I grew up in a family that had a family business. I know how hard it is. I know what the struggles are like. And our economy is built on people like you. And you deserve all our support and admiration and praise for doing what you are doing. I'm sorry things have been difficult. We had the referendum, and now our focus should be on making sure we make the best of all the opportunities. In an economy-wide sense, we're actually doing very well now at exporting around the world. But in order to help you, I have two specific things that I can do that will help. One of them is to make sure that we cut your taxes on business rates. When I talk to small retailers like yours, I think you said you had a premises, the thing that everyone talks to me about is business rates. That's why we've cut business rates for small retail restaurants, pubs, shops across the country and Labour on Wales, they haven't done that, so everyone's taxes are going up.

91
Well I think you've heard it all from a Prime Minister who's just got absolutely nothing left positive to say. 13 years of economic failure, 13 years, sadly, of quite a lot of educational failure, 13 years in which inequality's got worse, in which deep poverty's got worse, in which they haven't got to grips with the problems. That's what you hear. Let me give you some positive things that we would that would make a difference. We've got to get the basics right. I'm very clear that teaching children to read and write using the old fashioned synthetic phonics method, that works best. Setting by ability so you accept that not every child's the same, let's actually stretch the brightest pupils and help those falling behind. That can make a big difference. I had a big argument this week with someone on the pavement about special needs education. I want every child to have a choice between special needs education and mainstream education, but, please, let's stop closing the special schools that do so much for families in our country. Education is about the basics, yes. It's also about then aspiration, saying to every child, no matter where they come from, you can go all the way according to your talent. That's what education should be like, and that's what it would be under our Government.

92
Coming back to the original point as well, the Tories promised to end Section 21, no full evictions. They haven't. And that's sent homelessness soaring, especially for families. And we also have said we need to make work pay so that people that one of the most scandalous things I've seen, I've talked about my childhood when my mum and dad was on the gyro, we didn't have to go to a food bank. The people using food banks now are actually in work.

93
There are two immediate things that we should be doing. We should be doing, as a country, we should be leading the way globally with a worldwide initiative to plant hundreds and hundreds of millions of trees to capture CO2. The next thing we should do is we need to invest in major technology, green technology, so that we can capture CO2 and reduce CO2 emissions. There's one more thing that we don't talk enough about, and that is recycling our own waste. My son in Asia, he rang me up in horror when he saw, and he was clearing up, piles and piles of plastic bottles on beaches in Asia, and where did they come from? Supermarkets in Britain. We have to recycle our own waste.

94
We are going to train 3 million more apprentices. We're going to build 200,000 houses for people to buy. We're going to keep on with this reduction in unemployment that sees 2 million more people in work. But we won't do it if we go back to the debt, the welfare, the spending and the taxes.

95
No, it's an absolute myth actually that the IPCC report was somehow advocating moving away from meat and milk, the kind of produce that we produce in a temperate, wet, largely wet climate like in Wales, actually animals fed on grassland make a positive contribution because grass is one of the most important stores of carbon that we have. If you lose that, if you move away from that, actually you move to scrub etc, then you actually actually lead to higher emissions as a result of that. The real message on food, right, is that we, all of us, as individuals, public authorities, schools, NHS, etc., we need to be buying more locally. We need to create local food systems producing the whole range, both of plant protein and animal protein, and stop importing it to the level we do. And farmers are an important part of the climate change that we want to create because they are custodians of the environment and we should be involving them as allies rather than decrying them as the enemies of...

96
Not at all, because we are putting forward the solution, and it's got to be a political solution. We can invest more in the police. The money is there if we have the political will to do it. We know that austerity was a lie. It didn't have to happen. People have suffered needlessly. And when you've got Extinction Rebellion protesters on the streets pointing the finger at politicians and saying, you have put our lives at risk. You are playing fast and loose with our future. You didn't take that step 12 years ago that you should have. This is our last means of resort. I'm very proud to put my body on the line and stand in solidarity with them.

97
If we're going to make a real difference, we've got to change the energy balance in our country. And we've got to remove this fixation about using oil, our addiction to oil, our dependence on oil. And that's why our energy plan talks about how we can move with nuclear and renewables and oil and gas. We want 15% renewables by 2020. We're the world's leading offshore wind power at the moment and we want to do more in every area for renewables. So the questions I have to ask the two other parties is this, why are you so against nuclear power because it is the means by which we can balance off our energy supply without having the dependence on oil? And David, why don't you have a renewables target as we do so that we can use wind power? Why are you so against the onshore wind power that people are trying to develop? You seem to support it in principle but in every constituency where it happens, you seem to be against it. Let's get real also about getting this energy balance right.

98
I have to say the answer is clearly no, we can't afford to. I do agree with you. We look at North Africa, we look at the Middle East, we look at huge tensions in neighbouring Russia. The world is in a very dangerous place, perhaps a more dangerous place than it's been at any point since the fall of the Warsaw Pact. It is astonishing that we saw the last government run down defence spending. Nobody thought that a Conservative Prime Minister would run the British Army down to the size of 82,000, and they still won't commit to 2%. In fact, from what I can see, almost nobody is prepared to commit to 2%. I think we should commit to 2%. I think we need to go back to 2010 manning levels and Trident, expensive though it is, I'm afraid is a necessary thing to have in the modern world. I would also like to see us spend just a little bit more money looking after our ex-servicemen and women who've come home from repeated conflicts and not been looked after properly.

99
We absolutely need to look at every single layer of our society to do this. Our Green New Deal looks at our homes, our industry, our energy, and very importantly, our agriculture, our food, and how we deal with our land. At the moment, we focus far too much of our land on pasture. We don't have enough woods. We need to plant an awful lot more trees. We need to rewild our landscape. What about red leech? And it means some of the landscapes that are currently being used for pasture land for meat need to be changed to being forestry, need to be changed to being absorbing carbon as well. And that's really important.

100
Is that really that important? Let me answer that directly, because I think it's important. I think the most important duty of any government, anyone who wants to be Prime Minister of this country, is to protect and defend our United Kingdom. And are we really happy to say that we'd give up our independent nuclear deterrent when we don't know what's going to happen with Iran, we can't be certain of the future in China, we don't know exactly what our world will look like? I say we should always have the ultimate protection of our independent nuclear deterrent.

101
This is from the government that cut the police force by such massive numbers, privatised our probation service and got rid of all of our PCSOs in many parts of the country.

102
But of course, freedom of movement benefits British people. We can move freely across the European Union. And people can come here too. And that leaves massively advantages to our business, to our tourism industry, to our health service. It's about understanding that talking about these issues should be done in the interest of the country, not demonising people who come from somewhere else for short-term political benefit.

103
Just respond to the point that this was in the documents, is the claim being made? I mean, people can see for themselves. And it's just a desperate conspiracy theory. We're absolutely crystal clear. The NHS will not be on the table. The price the NHS pays for drugs will not be on the table. We will walk away from any trade discussion where that's put on the table. We care deeply about supporting our NHS.

104
Health has been used as a political football by Labour and the Conservatives in order to try to score points off each other ahead of the general election and the people that suffer most when that happens are the patients and the staff in the Welsh NHS. Now there are problems in health in England and in Wales. And my view is that those problems are exacerbated by cuts to social services, but they're also exacerbated by privatisation. And it was the Labour Party that began the process of privatisation in the health service. They introduced PFI schemes and they introduced foundation hospitals as well. And my view is that the private sector has no role in a public health service.

105
Well, I think one thing I would like to add is this. Nadim, you're right in implying none of the political parties has spelt out all the details. Some of them are simply not possible to spell out now but clearly more work will need to be done. We've gone further than others but clearly more will need to be done. Something which I think would make a huge difference to us all, as we deal with these very difficult decisions about how to balance the books, is for once to get the politicians actually working together on this. I've suggested - I don't know whether David Cameron and Gordon Brown want to take up my invitation - is that, regardless of the outcome of the general election next week, wouldn't it be a good thing to get the Chancellor, and the vice-chancellors of all the parties together, with the governor of the Bank of England, with the head of the Financial Services Authority, simply to, sort of, be open and be straight with you about how big this black hole is and roughly how long it's going to take to deal with it, so that we're all at least speaking from the same script about how big this problem is. I think politicians for once putting the country before themselves would be a very good thing on this issue.

106
I think we've just heard, again, the phrase that we've heard a lot from Ed this evening. the working people of this country. I wonder, Ed, what your views are on the words of Rachel Reeves, your Shadow Work and Pension Secretary, who said, I don't want to represent people on benefits. I don't want to represent the unemployed. Well, personally, as the Green Party, we want to represent the most vulnerable in this country, the disabled people, the unemployed, the people who've really suffered under this and your previous governments, the people in poverty. Now, I think that people out there who think that we should be standing up for the disabled, for the Independent Living Fund, for getting rid of the horrendous work capability assessment that your previous government brought in, the dreadful ATOS, the privatisation, people who are against that, if you vote Green, you're expressing your distaste for that approach to life and saying we have to protect our most vulnerable.

107
What I've said is there should be a review of the individual prisoner before release is countenance. That, I think, is absolutely clear. And that's why I asked for a role for both the parole board as well as the probation service in this. Because, listen, what happened was unbelievably appalling. And, therefore, we have to keep people safe and secure. But you don't do that by under-investing in rehabilitation programmes as well for all prisoners.

108
Yeah, to the gentleman there, you're absolutely right. We do need to get out, and we do need to get out in a timely fashion. What I do worry about Theresa May's speech, some of it was good, but she seemed to indicate that we might have transition arrangements in many, many areas for an unlimited and unspecified number of years. And people voted to come out. We want our fishing waters back. We want to control our borders. We want to come out of the single market, and we want to do it in as quick a time as possible.

109
That's a very good question. Firstly, some context for that, as you're probably aware. Scotland, because of our disproportionately high drug use back in the 1980s, there's an ageing cohort of drug users that have other health conditions, which is one, it's not the only reason, but it's one of the reasons for that rising number of drugs deaths. It's a public health emergency. It's not acceptable. What we are doing about it, we're investing more money in drug treatment services. We've established a a task force made up of experts but also people with lived experience of drug use to look at the different, more innovative things that we need to do. Power over the classification of drugs is still held at Westminster. One of the things that Glasgow City Council is wanting to do, and we are seeking the power in order to do that, is to establish in Glasgow what's called a safe consumption room, so that we can try to reduce some of the harm related to drugs. But this is one of the most important issues that we're facing in Scotland, and I think there is a real... I know there is a real determination, but I think it exists across parties to do absolutely that.

110
The issues are of poverty in Britain. The issues are of differential levels of spending in inner city areas compared to other areas. And there are serious issues about the number of young black people, particularly young men, who are part of the criminal justice system, end up in youth custody or youth justice institutions, or those that end up in mental health institutions. I think we have to look very seriously at levels of racism within our society. If you like racism that's almost of an institutionalized nature, that has to be looked at. And one of the issues we put forward was consider how difficult it can be for somebody with an African name or a Muslim name to get a shortlist or get an interview for a job compared to others. And so one suggestion, it's a suggestion, it may become a policy, is that we should have blind applications for jobs where there's no name involved, there's merely a description of your skills and your ability and your qualifications, so that there can be a fair assessment of that person. Because we are, a multi-ethnic, multi-lingual, multi-cultural society. If it doesn't treat everybody equally and give everybody a decent chance, then we end up with poverty, we end up with discrimination and we end up with divisions. I want to see a country that comes together and is not divided and apart by poverty or by discrimination.

111
Well, Carly, thank you. I completely agree about the importance of tackling climate change. And I think in this regard, it's amazing that our children are probably setting an example for us politicians. I have two young girls, and they focus on the little things, turning off all the lights in our house, turning off the taps when they're brushing their teeth, and making sure everything goes in the right recycling bin. And as a government, we've tried to do some big things, some of it in coalition previously, but we've made the UK the first place to commit legally to net zero. We're leading the world in banning single-use plastics and being the first country to phase out the use of coal. And whilst I think all of us on this stage might have slightly different approaches to how we get there, I think we all share the ambition of having a cleaner, greener planet to leave behind for our children.

112
I voted against it at the time it came up, and we would set any expansion of any airport against tests on noise, on pollution, on sustainability, and on climate change targets. And if we are to reduce the amount of flying going on, then we do have to invest in extending and expanding our rail network, and particularly the rail network into Europe. I mean, I looked at the price of going to Berlin the other week. One airline was offering a £19 single ticket to go to Berlin. To go by train would have cost £240 and the rail infrastructure was totally invested in by the public. There has to be a much more efficient link-up. of the Eurostar rail service with the whole of the rest of Europe in order to reduce the number of short-haul flights that go to Europe and there has to be an expansion of our rail network all across the country if we are to get people to use trains rather than flights and also make the train fares cheaper so that it is actually a real offer, an option for everybody in this country.

113
Well the Liberal Democrats are the party of Paddy Ashdown so it won't surprise you to know that we take defence very seriously. So first of all we would maintain the nuclear deterrent that we have. An absolute priority for us is reversing the cuts to our troops of 10,000 which has happened under the Conservatives. We would increase spending on defence year on year in the next Parliament, with the ambition of reaching 2.5% by the end of the next Parliament. Having decent homes for our veterans and for our armed forces is incredibly important. I'm very proud of the fact that it was a Liberal Democrat amendment that tried to make sure that every single home met the decent home standard. It was only because this general election was called that that particular piece of legislation fell, but it's a priority for us in the next Parliament.

114
I think one additional point that I would make is if you look at where so much of the burglary, so much of the car crime is coming from, it is actually coming from people who are addicted to drugs. And I think we've got to be much faster at getting drug addicts off the streets and into treatment. and all too often that doesn't happen. And even when it does today, they actually just get put on a substitute drug. And we're not really dealing with the problem, which is to get these people to confront their problems and lead drug-free lives. I even went to a drug rehab recently in my own constituency and met a young man who told me that he committed a certain amount of crimes so he could get in front of a judge who could then get him a place in a residential rehab centre. We must be mad as a country not to get people into that residential rehab, get them to clean up their lives, so we cut the crime on our own streets.

115
You were told that austerity and inequality, bankers bonuses and tuition fees were inevitable. They were not. You all deserve better. Let's put principles and values first. That's why I got into politics. The Green Party is determined to deliver a fair economy that does not make the poor and disadvantaged pay for the errors and fraud of the bankers. We're committed to returning the NHS to its founding principles, no public money going into private profits. We know we must take real action on climate change, the biggest threat facing us all. Other parties trade in fear, fear of immigrants, demonising people on benefits. But to build a decent, humane society, we start with hope. Vote for change. Vote Green.

116
I think the lady makes a very important point. Anyone who clearly can't stay at home, who has to live independently because of abuse or what have you, we have to make special provision for them and we would. But the situation today, where you can, age 18, leave school, sign on, get a flat, rather than work, or earn and learn at the same time. I don't think that's right. Look, other countries in Europe have almost abolished youth unemployment because they've taken this approach in, say, Germany or in Holland. And I think we should do the same thing. Look, we have created two million jobs in the last five years. Youth unemployment has come plummeting down. If we stick to the economic plan that's working, we can continue to get unemployment down and give young people what I want, which is the opportunity of an apprenticeship or a university place and the chance of a great career. Starting a life on benefits, frankly, is no life at all.

117
I've met some of the people who have rightly complained about the abuse that they were subject to when young, and it never leaves them. It's something that is with them always. And no matter what you can try to do to help, there is always this problem that they have to face up to every day, that they were abused, cruelly abused, by people in whom they placed their faith and trust. So the church has got to deal with these problems, and it's got to make sure that there is an open and clean confession about what has happened, and that we help those people who have been put into difficulty by this abuse. But you know, I welcome the Pope's visit to Britain and I want him to come to Britain for two reasons. One is the Catholic Church is a great part of our society and we should recognise it as such and I hope every British citizen wants to see this visit by the Pope take place. And secondly, we must break down the barriers of religion that exist in our world. The faiths must come together and recognise that they have common values and common interests They all believe that we should be good neighbours to each other. I'm from the Presbyterian religion, but I support the visit, but I not only support it, I want religious faith to work more closely together.

118
Well, I share the frustration of both our questions about the length of time it's taken to get Brexit done, and what we can do with the deal that we have is get it done by January 31st and come out, and then to get to the question about the advantages, we can do such things as improve our standards for animal welfare, ban the live export of animals, We can cut VAT on tampons. We can do things to create free ports around the country. There are all sorts of ways in which we can regulate differently and better. We can also, of course, control our immigration system for the first time in a long time. Now, what I haven't heard from the leader of the Labour Party is this deal that he thinks he can get in three months' time. Who is going to negotiate it? Because as far as I can see, everybody on the Labour frontbench is campaigning to remain, apart from Mr Corbyn, who is neutral on the matter, who is going to secure this deal? How can you get a deal, a new deal from Brussels for Brexit, if you don't actually believe in it? That's the mystery that I fell to.

119
You're saying people voted for 10% tariffs on cars?

120
I think this question of enthusiasm is really important that you put to us, because I'm not surprised that after 14 years of this, people feel that the hope's been beaten out of them, because the country is in such a state. They've had loads of promises made to them at the last election about what would happen, which haven't been delivered on. and beat the hope out of people. The very first question was about integrity in politics. And again, people haven't seen that integrity. You've had Partygate, you've had the breach of COVID rules, you've had the contracts for COVID, the instinct of some people to think the first thing in COVID I'm going to do is try to make money. Same with the gambling commission nonsense over the last few weeks. So this is an opportunity to restore that hope. I don't think we can do that by making grand promises of things that can't be delivered. I think it's the ordinary hope of working people. My family was working class. The ordinary hope of getting on yourself, getting on for your family, getting on for your community, and getting on for your country. It has to be rooted, if we're going to restore hope, in my view, in returning politics to service. Thank you. The sense that you come into politics to serve.
