QUESTIONER_0: So, let's get started.
QUESTIONER_0: Without further ado, will you please join me in welcoming the leader of the Labour Party, Jeremy Corbyn.
QUESTIONER_0: Good evening, Mr Corbyn.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you very much for being with us.
QUESTIONER_0: It's a pleasure.
QUESTIONER_0: Before we start, and I promise you I'm saying this to everybody, the aim tonight is to allow our audience here to ask you as many questions as possible.
QUESTIONER_0: So if you could keep your answers brief and to the point, that would be great.
QUESTIONER_0: And I hope you'll forgive me for interrupting if you don't.
QUESTIONER_0: So let's have our first question from Ian Parkin.
QUESTIONER_1: Good evening, Jeremy.
QUESTIONER_1: Should businesses be frightened of an incoming Labour government?
CORBYN: No, they should not be frightened of an incoming Labour government because our country's economy relies on many small and medium-sized enterprises that are the motor of our economy that often have great difficulty in accessing capital and accessing support for what they're trying to do.
CORBYN: The biggest businesses will be asked to pay a little bit more in corporation tax, but it will be lower
CORBYN: than it was in 2010, and indeed lower than the average for most industrial countries.
CORBYN: What I want to do is ensure that there is an economy thriving in every part of the country.
CORBYN: And so that means the resources.
CORBYN: It means an infrastructure system, roads and railways all across the country.
CORBYN: It means broadband in every part of our country that's free to everyone to use.
CORBYN: And that will mean that businesses can be set up anywhere.
CORBYN: It also
CORBYN: It is also clear in our manifesto here that what we're keen to do is ensure there is a better trained workforce in our society, so we will be promoting apprenticeships and skilled training at every level and give them the same value as academic education in universities.
CORBYN: And so I enjoy working with all the business organisations, setting out clearly our views on public ownership, our views on taxation and our views on investment for the future.
QUESTIONER_0: OK, there's two people with their hands up.
QUESTIONER_0: Let's hear from you both.
QUESTIONER_0: Starting with you, sir.
QUESTIONER_2: To be honest, Mr Corbyn, I don't think it's businesses who should be scared just.
QUESTIONER_2: I think it's everyone.
QUESTIONER_2: Your reckless socialist ideas are genuinely terrifying to me, my family and my friends, and I think freedom will completely erode if we let you have the keys to number 10.
QUESTIONER_0: OK, before you answer, Mr Corbyn, can I hear from you as well, please?
QUESTIONER_3: So what about the businesses that you're going to nationalise that then won't exist?
QUESTIONER_3: So when you're saying about free internet and the other likes of Virgin and Sky, then they haven't got a product to sell.
CORBYN: The issue of your views on rights and freedoms in our society, I absolutely defend the right of free speech.
CORBYN: I supported the introduction of the Human Rights Act.
CORBYN: I support the Convention on Human Rights.
CORBYN: Freedoms and rights in a democracy are very, very important.
CORBYN: I spent my life getting into hot water for defending people because I believe their human rights should not be violated.
CORBYN: And that's the kind of government that I intend to lead that does guarantee democracy.
QUESTIONER_0: So why do you think this man is frightened of you being in power?
CORBYN: Well, I can't understand what everything is going on in your mind that makes you say that, but whatever.
CORBYN: Maybe we can talk about it later if you like.
CORBYN: I want to live in a society where we do deal with the worst aspects of poverty that exist in our society, we do invest properly in our schools, we do give all our children a real chance and we do have a health service that is really there for all of us at all times.
CORBYN: That's the kind of agenda that I've spent my life dealing with.
CORBYN: The gentleman that asked the question about businesses,
CORBYN: On the questions of public ownership, which you're quite right to raise, our proposals are that we will take our railways, which after all were invested in and built by the rest of us, back into public ownership.
CORBYN: We'll take Royal Mail back into public ownership as it's a natural monopoly and our water industry
CORBYN: which has been asset-stripped to within an inch of its life by many of these water companies and wastes a great deal of water will come back into public ownership which will be run with consumer and worker involvement.
CORBYN: The new announcement we made last week was on broadband because I believe that the government's proposals are insufficient
CORBYN: Only 10% of households in the whole of the UK get access to fibre optic broadband.
CORBYN: We will make that 100% within 10 years, starting in the areas, the remote areas of the country, that have the least access at the moment.
CORBYN: Hence, we can get the business development done in those places.
QUESTIONER_0: OK, let's hear a little bit more from him.
QUESTIONER_0: Just the man in the white shirt.
QUESTIONER_4: Mr. Corbyn, I heard you talk about free speech and standing up for human rights.
QUESTIONER_4: And I have two young daughters.
QUESTIONER_4: And what terrifies me is I look at some of the Labour MPs, some female Labour MPs, and the misogyny that's happened in the Labour Party.
QUESTIONER_4: They've been driven out the party.
QUESTIONER_4: I look at a video on YouTube with Ruth Smith, particularly, because I'm willing to give you the benefit of the doubt in terms of maybe people are doing it in your name and not supported by you.
QUESTIONER_4: But I look at a video of Ruth Smith online, where she was in a press conference with you,
QUESTIONER_4: And basically, Ruth Smith, a Jewish MP, was heckled out of that press conference.
QUESTIONER_4: It's online, it's on YouTube.
QUESTIONER_4: And there you are, at the end of the press conference, chatting happily to that same heckler.
QUESTIONER_4: I don't buy this whole nice old grandpa.
QUESTIONER_4: I see that video, and that tells me all I need to know.
QUESTIONER_4: And I'm terrified for my daughters, because I see what you did in that video.
QUESTIONER_4: And I don't understand how you can say you stand up for human rights and free speech when that's how you support a Labour MP at a Labour press conference.
QUESTIONER_4: I think it's disgraceful.
CORBYN: Nobody should...
CORBYN: Nobody should suffer any abuse in public life or privately.
QUESTIONER_4: Clear.
CORBYN: Nobody should suffer abuse, and many women Labour MPs, Ruth Smith included and others, have suffered the most unbelievable levels of abuse.
CORBYN: And it was a Labour MP, Jo Cox, who was murdered because she stood up in public life.
CORBYN: I simply say to you that bad behaviour, misogynism, racism in any form, is absolutely not acceptable in any form whatsoever in my party or in our society.
QUESTIONER_4: then why, and it's online, why were you talking happily and with a smile on your face to that same heckler when she's been heckled in tears at the press conference?
QUESTIONER_4: Why would Labour MPs, female MPs, need bodyguards at a Labour conference?
QUESTIONER_4: I just don't understand it, but it seems like we're not going to come to an agreement.
CORBYN: I've had many conversations with Ruth Smith since then.
CORBYN: She's left the party.
CORBYN: The gentleman concerned I'd known for many years, and I did say hello to him as I left the meeting, as you would somebody you'd known as well.
CORBYN: Go and look at the video, Mr Corbyn.
CORBYN: And also, you don't know what was said between us.
QUESTIONER_0: Go and look at the video, Mr Corbyn, and see if it's fair.
QUESTIONER_0: Mr Corbyn, under your leadership, Labour has become the second political party after the BNP to be invested by the Equality and Human Rights Commission.
QUESTIONER_0: How do you feel to be in that kind of company?
CORBYN: It's our process that is being looked at and I'm very happy about that.
CORBYN: We've laid ourselves completely open to it.
CORBYN: We're the party that after all set up the Equality and Human Rights Commission and in government we will fund it properly and I think it's right that our processes should be examined.
CORBYN: We're the only party that actually has a full process to deal with abuse, racism in any form.
CORBYN: within our party or our society is simply not acceptable.
CORBYN: We have suspended and expelled members that have been guilty of any racist activity.
QUESTIONER_5: Jeremy Corbyn, you've talked about standing by human rights and so on, but recently you took a stance alongside Ivo Morales, who recently resigned and left Bolivia to Mexico.
QUESTIONER_5: There's protests in Bolivia that have turned violent in support of Ivo Morales, including food blockades that are starving cities like La Paz.
QUESTIONER_5: So how are you supporting human rights in that regard when you're standing with somebody who has protests that support him, that use such violent means to do so?
CORBYN: I met Evo Morales in Mexico last year.
CORBYN: I had a very long conversation with him about his country and about the economic development that's happened and the numbers of people that have been taken out of poverty.
CORBYN: Obviously, I follow what's going on in that country as I do in many other countries in the world.
CORBYN: He resigned from the presidency and now has moved out of Bolivia.
CORBYN: I ask and I support the other Latin American governments that have asked for a process of peace in Bolivia so that the Constitution can be restored, so that democratic government can come back.
CORBYN: That surely is the right thing to do.
QUESTIONER_5: I agree, but that's not what you said on Twitter.
QUESTIONER_5: You said you stand by Ivo Morales.
QUESTIONER_5: You took a position in something in such a...
QUESTIONER_5: a dispute right now, a civil unrest, that any opinion, one way or another, is turning violent.
QUESTIONER_5: So when you take a position in something like that, it emboldens the violence.
CORBYN: It's obvious there is civil unrest in Bolivia.
CORBYN: There are very strong feelings on both sides about people that feel they've been let down because Evo Morales is no longer president, others that probably don't support him at all.
CORBYN: Surely the function now is to try and bring people together.
CORBYN: I met Evo Morales last year.
CORBYN: I've met him over the years.
CORBYN: recognise that Bolivia, before he became president, was probably the poorest country in Latin America.
CORBYN: It isn't now.
QUESTIONER_0: OK.
CORBYN: I'm sorry to shut you down.
QUESTIONER_0: There's a lot of questions people want to get in.
QUESTIONER_0: Let's hear a question from Daniel Holt.
QUESTIONER_0: Where are you, Daniel?
QUESTIONER_6: Up here, yeah.
QUESTIONER_6: Mr Corbyn, will you campaign to remain or leave in the EU if elected?
QUESTIONER_6: Why would anyone vote Labour without knowing the answer to that question?
CORBYN: APPLAUSE Thank you.
CORBYN: Thanks for your question.
CORBYN: The issue of Brexit can be one that divides people enormously and it has and it does.
CORBYN: Our whole strategy, my whole strategy has been to try to bring people together however they voted in the referendum in 2016.
QUESTIONER_0: But the question is will you campaign to remain or leave the EU if elected?
QUESTIONER_0: Can I answer it?
QUESTIONER_0: No, I'd love you to answer it, that's it.
CORBYN: Right.
CORBYN: One, we will negotiate a credible leave deal with the European Union.
CORBYN: Let me finish, please.
CORBYN: I'm trying to answer the gentleman's question.
CORBYN: Secondly, we will put that alongside remain in a referendum.
CORBYN: My role and the role of our government will be to ensure that that referendum is held in a fair atmosphere, and we will abide by the result of it.
CORBYN: and I will adopt, as Prime Minister if I am at the time, a neutral stance so that I can credibly carry out the results of that to bring our communities and country together rather than continuing an endless debate about the EU and Brexit.
CORBYN: This will be a trade deal with Europe or remaining in the EU.
CORBYN: That will be the choice that we put before the British people within six months.
CORBYN: Any other option will require years of negotiations either with the EU or the USA and put our public services at risk.
QUESTIONER_6: Daniel, does that answer your question?
QUESTIONER_6: We've already had three and a half years of upheaval and the British people voted in 2016, so why do we need to vote again?
CORBYN: Well, I think the demands of people to try to, A, some parties want to revoke Article 50.
CORBYN: I actually voted to implement Article 50.
CORBYN: Some people wanted a second referendum.
CORBYN: Some people wanted leaving without any deal whatsoever, which I think would be catastrophic to our economy.
CORBYN: People voted remain, they voted leave but they didn't vote to lose their jobs, they didn't vote for deregulation, they didn't vote for damage to our economy and I think it's only sensible and reasonable to put that option back there to the people within six months in order to bring our country and society together to face the future together to bring about a fairer Britain.
QUESTIONER_7: I mean, this thing about saying that lots of people are groaning because he's saying that he's not going to take a clear position, there is actually precedence for this.
QUESTIONER_7: When there was a referendum on Europe in the 1970s, Howard Wilson remained neutral.
QUESTIONER_7: So for people to say, oh, this is ridiculous that he's not taking a position, it's false.
QUESTIONER_7: It's a false position.
QUESTIONER_7: The Liberal Democrats are saying reverse Brexit, stop Brexit.
QUESTIONER_7: Boris Johnson is saying get Brexit done.
QUESTIONER_7: The only person that actually has a clear strategy, a grown-up, sensible strategy, is this man right here, Jeremy Corbyn.
QUESTIONER_0: Just to be clear, Harold Wilson did actually say he was in favour, but he allowed a free vote on it.
QUESTIONER_0: Yes, the woman there.
QUESTIONER_8: Corbyn, I appreciate your efforts at bringing people together in this country.
QUESTIONER_8: I understand your strategy.
QUESTIONER_8: What I'm really interested in is that the Labour Party seems to be the only party which is developing a credible set of policies to deal with climate emergency.
QUESTIONER_8: Could you enlighten us about what you think your Labour Party policies would do for jobs and for a good future for young people in Sheffield?
CORBYN: Thank you.
CORBYN: Thank you very much for your question.
CORBYN: We face a climate emergency across the whole world.
CORBYN: It's very obvious.
CORBYN: Unusual and extreme weather patterns have got worse and worse.
CORBYN: The poorest and most vulnerable people in the poorest and most vulnerable places suffer first.
CORBYN: Others suffer later.
CORBYN: We signed up to the Paris Climate Change Accords in 2015.
CORBYN: I was there, I thought it was great, but it didn't go far enough and it's got to go much further.
CORBYN: So on May 1st this year, I proposed to Parliament that we declare a climate emergency in our country and that's now been replicated in many Parliaments around the world and I'm pleased about that.
CORBYN: But it does mean we've got to play our part by reducing emissions to get to net zero emissions.
CORBYN: It also means the possibilities of a huge number of jobs and development in our country in dealing with this emergency.
CORBYN: It means jobs in retrofitting houses to make them environmentally sustainable, to make them better insulated, to use less energy.
CORBYN: It means green energy jobs, wind, wave, solar.
CORBYN: It means big projects like Swansea Bay Lagoon.
CORBYN: It also means a lot has to be done in protecting our biodiversity, our seas and our rivers.
CORBYN: And so our whole strategy is to develop a green industrial revolution which will create hundreds of thousands of jobs in the future, starting very, very quickly.
CORBYN: And we will be therefore playing our part in getting to a more sustainable world and a Labour government
CORBYN: on the international stage, we'll be working with others to get to net zero and make sure that by our trading policies we don't end up inadvertently exporting pollution by having strong controls here but not insisting on equally strong controls somewhere else.
CORBYN: Thank you very much.
CORBYN: I'm very excited by everything that's in our green industrial revolution strategy, just as much as I admire those in the USA with the Green New Deal that they're putting forward.
QUESTIONER_0: OK, I'm going to take three or four points from the audience in a row, starting the woman over there.
QUESTIONER_9: I noticed in your opening speech that you mentioned about broadband again.
QUESTIONER_9: At a time when the NHS is desperately in need of funding and there's not an everlasting pot of money, why do you think that's a good use of taxpayers' money?
QUESTIONER_9: OK, let's hear from the man behind you then.
QUESTIONER_10: You said about negotiating another deal after the election.
QUESTIONER_10: How do we know that the deal you're going to get is going to be any better or even worse than what's already on offer?
QUESTIONER_10: And therefore, are we being offered something that's not worth having Brexit in the first place?
QUESTIONER_10: So really, it's not credible.
QUESTIONER_10: And the woman here in the black top.
QUESTIONER_11: Mr Corbyn, are you seriously saying that, should you be in government, you would come back with the new deal, it may be better than the Conservatives, it may not be, and then not campaign either way up until the referendum?
QUESTIONER_11: The Labour Party wouldn't campaign at all.
QUESTIONER_0: Well, we know some members of the Labour Party, some members of your cabinet would absolutely campaign for remain.
QUESTIONER_0: They've made it very clear.
CORBYN: OK. Can I deal with the broadband question first?
CORBYN: Thank you for it.
CORBYN: The issue is, as I said earlier, 95% of people in South Korea have access to broadband free.
CORBYN: We have, in this country, 10% access, and it costs people roughly £30 a month.
CORBYN: And it's quite selective, the areas...
CORBYN: It's not free in South Korea, though, is it?
CORBYN: For some people it is, I'm not sure about the whole country, but it is available for the whole country.
CORBYN: Our point is that by investing in it, it actually promotes economic growth and brings about a degree of social justice.
CORBYN: Listen, everyone in this room probably has a computer and uses access to broadband if they've got it, or some form of internet all the time.
CORBYN: It is the normal form of communication.
CORBYN: Yet there is a big digital divide between those that can afford the best and those that don't get any whatsoever.
CORBYN: I just want to make sure it's equally available for all.
CORBYN: And over 10 years, we would make sure it is.
CORBYN: And I think that's actually a sensible, up-to-date, modern way of looking at communications within our society.
QUESTIONER_0: So the question is, can we afford it?
CORBYN: Yes, we can afford it, because if we don't afford it, then what's the effect on areas that don't have access to broadband, on their economic development, on the investments that might come there, on the businesses that won't go there?
CORBYN: Listen, talk to a business about investing in, say, Cumbria, or, say, parts of Northumbria.
CORBYN: Say, would you open a factory or a shop or a small business here?
CORBYN: They'd say,
CORBYN: No, there's no broadband, there isn't good train access, there isn't good bus access or whatever else.
CORBYN: We have to invest in social infrastructure and transport infrastructure for the whole country.
CORBYN: Otherwise, the North-South divide, the inequalities between regions in England and between Scotland and Wales and England will simply get worse as a result of it.
CORBYN: This is a serious proposal in order to help bring economic development to all parts of our country.
QUESTIONER_0: And what do you make of the comments made by the Institute of Fiscal Studies today that in order to pay for the broadband and all the other things that you're suggesting, what they're saying is you can't do that by pretending that you're just going to tax the very rich, the top 5%.
QUESTIONER_0: You're going to have to tax an awful lot more of our audience.
CORBYN: I read the IFS comments very carefully obviously and we have here the grey book that we put forward which actually funds and costs the whole of our programme and manifesto and I was absolutely insistent that we as a party going into election put that forward.
CORBYN: It's only right that people should understand it.
CORBYN: is 95% of the population will pay no more whatsoever in tax.
CORBYN: The top 5% will pay a bit more.
CORBYN: Corporation tax will go up to a maximum of 26%, which is lower than it was in 2010, and lower than many countries in other parts of the world, including major industrial economies.
CORBYN: and we will then move into a situation where we become more or less mid-ranking in terms of provisions of funding of public services.
CORBYN: We'll still be way below all the Scandinavian countries, France and Germany.
CORBYN: What's happened in this country for too long is we've rolled back
CORBYN: the public realm.
CORBYN: We've rolled back on public services and loaded that problem onto individuals, families and they're often paying with it through personal debt.
CORBYN: I think we need to rebalance a bit and start investing in people and communities as a whole and that's what our manifesto does.
QUESTIONER_12: Yes, you.
QUESTIONER_13: Hi.
QUESTIONER_13: I work for a charity that delivers digital inclusion, and it's not just about broadband, it's more than that.
QUESTIONER_13: Giving broadband to households is great, but what are we going to do to make sure that we close the gap?
QUESTIONER_13: People can use Facebook, people can use certain websites, but there's other things they can't do, they can't navigate.
QUESTIONER_13: Public service websites, NHS advice, how are you going to ensure that people get that as well as broadband access?
CORBYN: Well if they've got good quality broadband obviously that's a start and clearly there has to be full accessibility to public services online because there is, you're quite correct, a digital divide where public services increasingly, doctors appointments and everything else are done online and there are a significant number of people in the country that
CORBYN: don't necessarily have smartphones, probably don't have computers and can't access those things and that becomes a form of social exclusion.
CORBYN: So I would always make it a requirement that public services must be available also in the more traditional ways as well so that nobody is left out because there's nothing worse
CORBYN: than people that are told, for example, to go online to sort out their universal credit, can't get online because they haven't got a computer or a smartphone.
CORBYN: How on earth are they supposed to access universal credit in that sense?
CORBYN: That's why we will end universal credit and bring back a serious system.
QUESTIONER_14: I know your comment regarding broadband is very good, but one thing I want to ask, you are talking about delaying the Scottish independence referendum and Boris Johnson talking about refusing it.
QUESTIONER_14: Is the UK like the Hotel California, you can check out any time you want but you can never leave?
QUESTIONER_14: Another thing, what gives Westminster...
QUESTIONER_14: The last debate you and the Prime Minister were on, there were two
QUESTIONER_14: Westminster MPs telling Scotland what they are not getting.
QUESTIONER_14: Surely we should start listening to the Scottish people first and let us have a vote.
QUESTIONER_0: Before you answer, Mr Corbyn, I think you might have practised that line before.
QUESTIONER_0: Let's hear from Max Cruikshank.
QUESTIONER_0: Where are you?
QUESTIONER_0: Is that you there?
QUESTIONER_15: Yes, Jeremy.
QUESTIONER_15: Scotland voted overwhelmingly against leaving Europe and for pro-independence, pro-independence government.
QUESTIONER_15: Why will Labour not support us in deciding our own future?
CORBYN: OK, thanks for your questions, and thanks for the way that you've put them.
CORBYN: An incoming Labour government will invest a great deal across the UK, including 100 billion pounds will go into Scotland over 10 years.
CORBYN: That will be a massive game changer in Scotland, where you have the worst levels of poverty and health inequality in Glasgow.
CORBYN: You have serious levels of child poverty and housing stress.
CORBYN: You know that as well as I do.
CORBYN: So the question is, why will you not support it, or will you support a referendum?
CORBYN: And, and I've said that I don't see a priority in Scotland of having an independence referendum.
CORBYN: What I see as a priority is investing in the social and capital needs of Scotland.
CORBYN: And so, in the early years of a Labour government, we will not be supporting an independence referendum.
CORBYN: Instead, we'll be investing in Scotland and working with whoever the government is in Scotland to deliver that programme, deliver that improvement in
CORBYN: in business infrastructure, in transport infrastructure and in the social needs of the people of Scotland.
QUESTIONER_0: So just so we're clear, what does the early years mean?
CORBYN: Is that year two, year three, year four?
CORBYN: The early years, first two years at least.
CORBYN: So not in the first two years.
CORBYN: I want to deliver a capital investment programme for the whole of the UK.
CORBYN: No, no, I heard that.
CORBYN: I heard that very clearly.
CORBYN: And that will be our focus.
CORBYN: And so it will not be in the early part of the new Parliament.
CORBYN: So not in the first two years.
QUESTIONER_0: So certainly not 2020, as Nicola Sturgeon wants.
QUESTIONER_0: Yes, there's a man there in the black shirt.
QUESTIONER_0: Yes, actually, both got black shirts.
QUESTIONER_0: I was very confused.
QUESTIONER_0: Yes, in the black T-shirt.
QUESTIONER_16: So what gives it your right to be your priority if it's a priority of the Scottish people?
CORBYN: There are elections in Scotland in 2021, and obviously an expression will come from that.
CORBYN: It is, I think, our right as a party to put forward a programme for the whole of the UK, and that is what we're doing, an investment strategy for the whole of the UK, and point out, I point out, that Scotland will get 100 billion of investment under a Labour government which will make a very significant difference to the lives of people all across Scotland.
CORBYN: That, I'm sure, is something you would welcome.
QUESTIONER_16: Jeremy, there's already a mandate from Scottish people to have another referendum.
QUESTIONER_16: Well, there is actually.
QUESTIONER_16: There is a mandate from the last Scottish parliamentary elections and Scottish people have voted for that mandate.
CORBYN: We are putting forward a proposal which I think will be very beneficial to all parts of the UK, including Scotland.
CORBYN: And I think you have to look at the situation of the income and expenditure levels as they affect Scotland.
CORBYN: Surely
CORBYN: Scotland needs to be able to address the problems it has, and the industrial and green infrastructure investment that it absolutely needs.
CORBYN: That's all it means, Scotland, they're telling me.
QUESTIONER_0: I'm sorry, I know you want to make your point, but there's so many hands, it's not fair if I just give it all to you.
QUESTIONER_0: Yes, the man here in the check shirt.
QUESTIONER_17: Yes, what you're saying is promising things for Scotland to try and avoid another independence referendum.
QUESTIONER_17: very similar to what happened in 2014 with other promises made by senior Labour members with the fictitious bow.
QUESTIONER_17: How on earth can we trust that this would not be another case of broken promises?
CORBYN: Since 2014 there has been a Tory government in the UK and that is one of the problems.
QUESTIONER_0: Can we hear from the woman here in the front?
QUESTIONER_18: In 2014, there was a triple mandate saying that we would be allowed to have a second vote if it went against the will of the people and getting taken out of Europe is against the will of the people in Scotland.
QUESTIONER_0: Do you mind?
QUESTIONER_0: I seem to have unerringly found all the stuff in the audience at once.
QUESTIONER_0: Marvellous to have you here, but there are lots of questions on other things.
QUESTIONER_0: Will you forgive me if I see if I can... No, not you, matey, cos I know you definitely want to ask about Scotland.
QUESTIONER_0: Yes, at the back.
QUESTIONER_0: Is your question about Scotland?
QUESTIONER_0: Slightly.
QUESTIONER_3: Oh, maybe, then.
QUESTIONER_0: We have very little time left, so we'll be very brief.
QUESTIONER_3: So, if you had a choice of getting into power and signing up a deal with the SNP, that's not going to change, then you're not going to say, OK, Nicola, we'll give you what you want so we can get into power.
QUESTIONER_0: OK, that definitely is about Scotland.
QUESTIONER_0: Anyone got a question?
QUESTIONER_0: Yes, the man there.
QUESTIONER_19: It's not about Scotland.
QUESTIONER_19: I just think, Jeremy, have you finally got an opportunity, after nine years as the Tories, to get rid of the legacy of Thatcher and Blair and the market and the things that are in your manifesto that improve people's lives?
QUESTIONER_19: The first question was about being frightened.
QUESTIONER_19: I'm not frightened.
QUESTIONER_19: I'm only frightened when I see people on the streets, when I see people can't get health care, all those things.
QUESTIONER_19: Are you finally in a position you win and you can put it right?
QUESTIONER_0: OK, let's just hear from one mate in the green top at the back.
QUESTIONER_0: The woman in the green top, right at the back with the glasses on.
QUESTIONER_0: No, the woman in the back in the green top.
QUESTIONER_0: Yes.
QUESTIONER_20: You say that you're not going to increase taxation, but I've read today that in your manifesto it states that you're going to abolish the married persons tax for couples on a lower combined income.
QUESTIONER_20: I mean, how can that be fair?
QUESTIONER_20: I mean, in the last year it cost something like £480 million.
QUESTIONER_20: That's a drop in the ocean compared to what else you're planning on spending.
CORBYN: OK.
CORBYN: I'll try and deal with some of those questions, if I may.
CORBYN: You've got about a minute left, I'm afraid, Mr Corbyn.
QUESTIONER_0: You've got about a minute left.
QUESTIONER_0: You're going to have to do a quick fire round of answering those.
CORBYN: First of all, we're not doing any deals with any other parties.
CORBYN: I'm not trying to form a coalition government.
CORBYN: I'm fighting this election to win it for Labour, to win it for the people of this country, to end universal credit, deal with the issues of inequality, injustice and poverty, and deliver an economy that absolutely works for all.
CORBYN: And our taxation proposals will affect the richest 5% of the people in this country.
CORBYN: We will end the marriage tax allowance because I think it's discriminatory against non-married couples and it ought to be treated equally across the society and individual taxation is a fairer way of doing things.
CORBYN: Our manifesto, fully prepared, fully costed, I think this is an opportunity for our country to come together, deal with the inequality, injustice and poverty and actually go forward to the future with some real degree of hope.
CORBYN: Thank you very much.
QUESTIONER_0: And just to be clear, in a yes or no answer, you are telling us tonight that you will remain... Just to be clear, in a yes or no answer, you're telling us tonight you will remain neutral on the issue of whether or not we should remain within the EU.
QUESTIONER_0: First heard here on Question Time.
QUESTIONER_0: First heard here on Question Time.
QUESTIONER_0: Mr Corbyn, thank you very much indeed.
QUESTIONER_0: There we are.
QUESTIONER_0: So don't forget, in half an hour, we'll be hearing from Jo Swinson, and after that, Boris Johnson.
QUESTIONER_0: But now, can we please welcome the First Minister of Scotland and leader of the Scottish National Party, Nicola Sturgeon.
QUESTIONER_0: Good evening, First Minister.
QUESTIONER_0: Good evening.
QUESTIONER_0: We are delighted, of course, to have you here.
QUESTIONER_0: I'm going to say the same thing to you as I'm saying to all the party leaders.
QUESTIONER_0: The aim is to allow time for our lovely audience here, who've got lots of questions, lots of opinions already, to put as many points to you as possible.
QUESTIONER_0: So I'll be grateful if you keep your answers brief and to the point.
QUESTIONER_0: And forgive me if I interrupt you... Of course.
QUESTIONER_0: ..if you don't.
QUESTIONER_0: So, let's take our first question for Nicola Sturgeon from Shirley Duncan.
QUESTIONER_0: Where are you?
QUESTIONER_0: Yes, Shirley Duncan.
QUESTIONER_21: Sturgeon, if there is a hung Parliament, what is the price of your cooperation with a minority government?
STURGEON: Obviously, it is a very good and relevant question for everybody across the UK.
STURGEON: The SNP may well hold the balance of power in a hung Parliament after this election.
STURGEON: Let me say, we will use that influence, if we have it, responsibly and in the interests, of course, of standing up for Scotland, but also in the interests of progressive values for people right across the UK.
STURGEON: Let me be very honest, I could not, in good conscience, ever put Boris Johnson into number 10 Downing Street.
STURGEON: because I have seen the misery that Tory policies have heaped upon people.
STURGEON: Jeremy Corbyn may not be my choice of Labour leader but I don't get to choose the Labour leader.
STURGEON: In terms of what I would seek to win from a minority Labour government, obviously I would
STURGEON: ask for and expect Jeremy Corbyn to respect the right of the Scottish people to choose their own future.
STURGEON: Because it is not for Westminster to decide, it is for the people of Scotland.
STURGEON: But I would also want an end to austerity.
STURGEON: I would want to see an end to the misery of universal credit.
STURGEON: I would want to see an NHS protection bill so that our NHS cannot be put at the mercy of Donald Trump in a trade deal.
STURGEON: I would want to see fairer pensions for our older people.
STURGEON: The UK has one of the lowest pensions in the OECD.
STURGEON: So these are the progressive policies that the SNP would champion, yes, for people in Scotland, but also for the benefit of people right across the UK.
QUESTIONER_0: OK, well, let's come back to this independence referendum, what you talked about already at some point.
QUESTIONER_0: We've just heard the Labour leader saying that he would not offer you a second independence referendum for at least two years of a Labour government.
QUESTIONER_0: You said, or you have said many times, you want to do that next year.
QUESTIONER_0: So how's that going to work?
STURGEON: Well, you know, firstly, let me explain my position, and then I'll perhaps speculate on Jeremy Corbyn's, if I may.
STURGEON: Well, you don't need to speculate, because he told us right here, so would you accept it?
STURGEON: I'll speculate on what his position might be after the election, as opposed to what he said here today.
STURGEON: Oh, I see.
STURGEON: OK.
STURGEON: But my position is one of principle.
STURGEON: There'll be differences of opinion in this room on Scottish independence.
STURGEON: Of course there is a difference of opinion in Scotland on Scottish independence.
STURGEON: I would not be asking Jeremy Corbyn to support independence.
STURGEON: but simply to accept the principle that that is a question that should be decided by the people of Scotland, not by Westminster.
STURGEON: Now, I guess, if I can turn to the position that I think Jeremy Corbyn might take after an election, I've heard some of what Jeremy Corbyn has been saying to you this evening.
STURGEON: He spoke with a lot of passion.
STURGEON: I don't agree with him on everything, but I do agree with a great deal of what he was talking about, about public spending, health, austerity...
STURGEON: But the key thing, as you said, not for the first two years.
STURGEON: But that's the point I'm coming on to.
STURGEON: I'm asking you, having heard Jeremy Corbyn, do you think he's going to walk away from the chance to end austerity, to protect the NHS, to stop universal credit, simply because he wants, for a couple of years, to prevent Scotland to have the right to self-determination?
STURGEON: Jeremy Corbyn supports the right of self-determination for almost every other country in the world.
STURGEON: I'm not sure he's going to compromise the chance to have a Labour government for that issue.
QUESTIONER_0: So you think he's saying one thing to our audience,
QUESTIONER_0: and to everyone at home, and he's going to be saying another thing to you privately.
STURGEON: Look, you're putting it maybe more bluntly, I will be more diplomatic.
STURGEON: Just calling it like it is.
STURGEON: But the point is, I lead a minority government in Scotland, so I know the compromises that you have to make to govern in that situation.
STURGEON: Of course he is putting a manifesto forward, but if he is in the position of needing the support of the SNP, then I think he will choose to do some of the things that are in his manifesto.
STURGEON: I don't think he will turn his back on that in order to block the right of the people of Scotland to choose their own future.
STURGEON: I would ask you to make your own minds up on that.
STURGEON: The man here in the front.
QUESTIONER_22: So are you saying that you would prioritise the Scottish independence referendum over ending austerity?
STURGEON: I want the Scottish people to have the right to choose their own future.
STURGEON: Fundamentally for Scotland, we have put up with... Scotland has not voted for a Conservative Westminster Government for 60 years.
STURGEON: For 36 of those 60 years, we have had to put up with a Tory Government.
STURGEON: the European Union against our will.
STURGEON: I want Scotland to determine our own future.
STURGEON: But in answer to your question, I will never put a Tory Prime Minister into power.
STURGEON: I grew up in the west of Scotland.
STURGEON: I saw the damage.
STURGEON: I grew up in the Thatcher years.
STURGEON: I saw the damage that Tory governments did to Scotland and to communities across the UK.
STURGEON: I will never support a Tory government.
STURGEON: But if Jeremy Corbyn wants the support of the SNP, I don't think it should surprise people to hear me say that I would ask him to respect the right of the people of Scotland to choose their own future.
STURGEON: And I don't think he'll turn his back on ending austerity in order to block that right.
QUESTIONER_0: OK, well, you heard it here, folks.
QUESTIONER_0: I'm going to take a few questions, if you don't mind, and then perhaps you can answer them in a row.
QUESTIONER_0: Yes, the woman here.
QUESTIONER_23: Hello, yes, good evening.
QUESTIONER_23: At the moment, the talk is that the UK government are focusing too much on Brexit and negating other issues.
QUESTIONER_23: But don't you think that's happened in Scotland?
QUESTIONER_23: Jeremy Corbyn actually just brought up that social inequality is huge.
QUESTIONER_23: I know that knife crime in Glasgow particularly is a big problem.
QUESTIONER_23: Do you not think by leading with Scottish independence, you're actually negating other issues, like the UK government are doing now with Brexit?
QUESTIONER_0: OK, let's take a couple more before you answer.
QUESTIONER_0: Yes, the man here.
QUESTIONER_24: similar, I suppose, but just around if there is a Labour government that you are supporting in coalition and that Labour government takes us through a second referendum and we don't leave Europe, given that the Labour mandate does correspond with yours quite so well, will you still be pushing for an independence referendum for Scotland?
QUESTIONER_0: And just the men at the back.
QUESTIONER_25: Over the past few years, we've all borne witness to the farce of a Brexit negotiation.
QUESTIONER_25: So if Scotland were to get its referendum and it were to win, what guarantees could you make to the rest of the union that we wouldn't see the horrible result of the Brexit negotiations with the to-ing and fro-ing of the hard borders and customs unions and things like that?
QUESTIONER_0: OK. Lots of different questions you'd like to try and address.
STURGEON: I will try to do it as briefly as possible.
STURGEON: On the question, very good question, about are we prioritising independence over other issues, I would say that the evidence says no.
STURGEON: Don't get me wrong, Scotland has challenges, all countries have challenges.
STURGEON: As First Minister, I face challenges in our public services every single day and my job is to confront those.
STURGEON: But if you look at some of the policies... Well, if you look at some of the policies in Labour's manifesto published this week,
STURGEON: If you take things like free prescriptions, free university education, restoring the nursing bursary, opposition to fracking, for example, these are all things that my government in Scotland has already done.
STURGEON: So we're getting on with delivering those progressive policies, but we want to be in charge of our own future, not to turn our backs on the rest of the UK.
STURGEON: We'll always be the closest friends and neighbours, but so that we don't get dragged down paths by Tory governments that we don't want to go down.
STURGEON: The second question on if there is a second EU referendum and the UK votes to remain.
STURGEON: I hope that happens.
STURGEON: I've campaigned and worked as hard as possible, as has the SNP, to try to find a way for the whole UK to stay in the EU, because I think that's the best future.
QUESTIONER_0: And then you won't need to call for a second independence referendum, because there won't be the material change that you talked about last time.
QUESTIONER_0: which you need, according to yourself, to have one.
STURGEON: The case for independence doesn't rest solely on Brexit.
STURGEON: Brexit is one example, it's a very extreme example of the way in which Scotland is treated with contempt often by Westminster.
STURGEON: And we've seen that over the past three years.
STURGEON: We've tried to compromise, we've tried to find ways to protect Scotland's interests, and that hasn't happened.
STURGEON: So I think Scotland does need to make that choice about taking a future
STURGEON: into our own hands.
STURGEON: And thirdly, because this is a very good question about, you know, will independence be as difficult as Brexit?
STURGEON: And, you know, I... You've probably noticed this.
STURGEON: I oppose Brexit.
STURGEON: I think Brexit is a big mistake.
STURGEON: But what I don't think is that the mess that Brexit has become was inevitable.
STURGEON: That was down to the fact that the Brexiteers, if I can be undiplomatic for a moment, told a lot of lies, one of them on the side of a bus.
STURGEON: It was down...
STURGEON: down to the fact that there was no honesty or frankness about the implications, no planning done in advance, and then Theresa May came out with all these contradictory red lines that could never be reconciled.
STURGEON: Contrast that with the independence referendum in 2014.
STURGEON: Whether you agreed with the proposition or not, there was a very detailed proposition.
STURGEON: We had done the work, we had done the thinking, we had a whole transition programme ready to go had the result gone the other way.
STURGEON: I don't think we should allow the Brexiteers, who made such a hash of Brexit, to tar all positive change with their brush.
STURGEON: They messed it up.
STURGEON: It doesn't mean others have to mess it up as well.
STURGEON: And you want a confirmatory referendum on Brexit.
QUESTIONER_0: Would you also want a confirmatory referendum on your independence deal by the same token?
STURGEON: That is actually connected to the answer I've just given.
STURGEON: Oh, I didn't hear that answer.
QUESTIONER_0: Would you want a confirmatory referendum on your independence deal?
STURGEON: If you'll let me answer it in my own terms, if I may, because I was drawing the contrast between the mess of Brexit and the different approach taken for independence.
STURGEON: I don't think it was inevitable that Brexit was a mess, therefore I don't think it was inevitable that we were in the position of having another referendum.
QUESTIONER_0: So would you want a confirmatory referendum?
STURGEON: I don't think the position we are in right now with Brexit had to be like this.
STURGEON: That was down to the bad planning, the lack of planning, which I don't think the proponents of independence would allow to happen.
STURGEON: Can we hear from Rebecca Ferguson?
QUESTIONER_26: I would like to know,
QUESTIONER_26: perspective of maybe if we leave the EU or not, if you are denied by government a second independence referendum for Scotland, what particular action will you take following that decision?
QUESTIONER_26: And whether that's because they've said no or whether because maybe Jeremy Corbyn's government are dragging their heels and it's going on and you were promised but you're not quite getting it, what action will you take?
STURGEON: Well, you know, people understandably ask me that all the time, and what I say, and I know it sounds like a typical politician's way of avoiding the answer before I say it is... Oh, no, we don't want that.
STURGEON: Well... Not tonight.
STURGEON: I know, because I genuinely don't like to answer questions that way, but if I come to that point, then I'll set out how I'll cross that bridge when I come to it.
STURGEON: And, yes, I've thought a lot about that, but I don't want to talk about that right now, because that is me conceding that these Westminster politicians actually have a right to block
STURGEON: Scotland's ability to choose our own future and actually we're in an election campaign right now and people in Scotland have an opportunity to send a very clear message that they want to be in charge of their own future and that's what I'm asking them to do.
STURGEON: But the government does have a right to block it.
STURGEON: Your government has the veto on it.
STURGEON: I don't think they have a moral or a democratic right to block the right.
STURGEON: It has never been legally challenged.
STURGEON: I have always accepted and I continue to accept that the transfer of power is necessary and desirable.
STURGEON: But I don't believe they have a moral or democratic right.
STURGEON: We are in an election campaign and there is an opportunity for Scotland to make that abundantly clear.
QUESTIONER_26: Surely if obviously you said you were trying not to give a politician's answer because it would be almost conceding defeat like they had a right to block the will of the Scottish people but surely for people in Scotland it would give them confidence that you will see through what they want if you actually set out your contingency plans for if it's denied to you surely you would want to bring Scotland together and actually tell them actually
QUESTIONER_26: we are our own country, we have a right to determine our own future and this is what we will do if we are denied it by this way.
STURGEON: No I think that's a fair point but what I'm saying to Scotland right now and as I said if I come to that point then I will set out exactly to people in Scotland what I think we should do then but what I'm saying to Scotland now in a general election campaign is we have the ability to
STURGEON: to send that message and make that view and that voice very clear.
STURGEON: And that's what I hope people in Scotland will do for that reason.
STURGEON: But I also hope they'll vote SNP so that we can contribute to all of these other social and economic policies that I've been talking about.
STURGEON: OK, there's a few hands up.
QUESTIONER_0: Let's hear from the man there in the blue sweater.
QUESTIONER_27: In the 2014 referendum, the EU turned around to Scotland and said if they voted for independence, we'd be classed as a third state.
QUESTIONER_27: So they'd be out basically voting to leave the EU in a sense, and they'd have to rejoin as an independent nation.
QUESTIONER_27: How would you get around that?
QUESTIONER_27: You argue that you're so against Brexit and so on, but surely your own independence is another form of Brexit.
QUESTIONER_27: And also, alongside that, Scotland has the issue of its deficit.
QUESTIONER_27: How would you get Scotland's deficit down
QUESTIONER_27: to levels that would be acceptable for the EU to admit you.
QUESTIONER_27: And you've got the issue of Spain.
QUESTIONER_27: Would Spain admit you when they've got their own issues with separatists in Catalonia?
QUESTIONER_27: How will you get round that?
QUESTIONER_0: Scotland has the largest deficit in Europe at 7%.
QUESTIONER_0: It needs to be 3% or less.
STURGEON: Can I take the gentleman's questions in turn?
STURGEON: There are a lot of questions in there, let me try to take them in turn.
STURGEON: Firstly, with the greatest of respect, Europe did not say that in 2014.
STURGEON: Europe did not make any
STURGEON: comment about what would happen if Scotland voted for independence.
STURGEON: It certainly didn't say that Scotland would not be allowed to be a member of the European Union.
STURGEON: Some may have taken from their body language, they weren't that keen on it, but they didn't actually say that.
STURGEON: Nor has Spain ever said that it would veto the membership of an independent Scotland.
STURGEON: What Spain has said is that if it is done constitutionally and legally, they would respect that.
STURGEON: and I travel a lot around the European Union and there's been a sea change in attitudes towards Scottish independence since Brexit, both in the institutions and in member states.
STURGEON: The European Union, since it was first established, has sought to enlarge itself.
STURGEON: I think the idea that it's going to try to kick out or not allow in part of a member state that has been there for 40 years is kind of inconceivable.
STURGEON: On the deficit, can I firstly make this point?
STURGEON: Exclude London, because London skews a lot of the economic calculations for the UK.
STURGEON: Scotland's deficit is not out of sync with the rest of the UK.
STURGEON: But the thing is, London is in the UK.
STURGEON: OK, but in terms of... Because Scotland is often treated as an outlier, London is actually the outlier and Scotland is in line.
STURGEON: But that is... We'll leave that point to one side, because I can see I'm not convincing you.
STURGEON: Well, what about you?
STURGEON: I mean, it doesn't really matter if it's convincing me.
STURGEON: OK, but the other point is Scotland's deficit is falling.
STURGEON: It fell by £1 billion in the most recent year.
STURGEON: Our onshore revenues went up by £3 billion.
STURGEON: But my more fundamental point is this.
STURGEON: If the argument against independence is that Scotland has a big deficit, that is a deficit that has been accrued under the Westminster system of governance.
STURGEON: And if we've got a big deficit because of that, that's not an argument for Scotland staying the same.
QUESTIONER_0: So what responsibility do you take for that?
STURGEON: Well, I don't control, as First Minister, the macroeconomic policies of the United Kingdom.
STURGEON: I wish I did in some respects, but I don't.
STURGEON: So Scotland does not take all of the decisions in our own government that govern these things.
STURGEON: But the point I'm making is, if you look at independent countries similar in size to Scotland all over Europe, they're richer, they're more prosperous,
STURGEON: Why shouldn't Scotland, with all the natural and human and social resources we have, be capable of emulating that if we have the powers to do that within our own hands?
STURGEON: Thank you.
QUESTIONER_28: Who ever promised once in a generation referendum?
QUESTIONER_29: Look, democracy...
QUESTIONER_28: Who ever promised it?
QUESTIONER_28: I hear it from Boris Johnson, I hear it from Corbyn.
QUESTIONER_28: Who actually promised once in a generation?
STURGEON: Look, if Brexit hadn't happened, do I think right now...
STURGEON: I would still support independence, OK?
STURGEON: I'm not going to pretend otherwise.
STURGEON: But do I think right now we'd be standing here talking about having another independence referendum so imminently?
STURGEON: Probably not.
STURGEON: But circumstances have changed dramatically.
STURGEON: And in a democracy...
QUESTIONER_28: Anybody say promise?
STURGEON: In a democracy, when circumstances change, people have to have the right to change their mind.
STURGEON: And if they don't have that right, then I don't believe what we're living in is a democracy.
STURGEON: I can't force Scotland to choose independence just as I can't force the UK to stay in the EU.
STURGEON: But I do believe we should have that choice so that whatever path we take as a country, whatever kind of country we are going to become, it's one we've chosen ourselves.
STURGEON: It's not one that we've had the likes of Boris Johnson decide for us.
QUESTIONER_28: But was the word promise used?
STURGEON: If by who, sorry?
STURGEON: Exactly.
QUESTIONER_28: Well, look, people said in 2014... Did anybody say promise?
QUESTIONER_28: Not to my knowledge.
QUESTIONER_28: No, but Boris Johnson keeps repeating it.
QUESTIONER_28: OK. Jeremy Corbyn keeps repeating it.
QUESTIONER_0: OK, we hear you.
QUESTIONER_0: I think you've had your answer.
QUESTIONER_0: Let's hear from a few more people in the audience.
QUESTIONER_0: Yes, the woman there with the glasses.
QUESTIONER_30: So, in terms of the fact that Scotland needs to reduce its deficit in order to be allowed into the EU, does it therefore not make sense that independence wouldn't be a priority and Jeremy Corbyn's policies of putting more business and more infrastructure into Scotland should happen first so that you then can get into the EU?
QUESTIONER_0: Do you mind if I take a couple more points?
QUESTIONER_0: Yes, the man here sitting right by me, I can't miss you.
QUESTIONER_31: Thank you.
QUESTIONER_31: Nicola, our grandparents fought and died to protect Britain and the United Kingdom.
QUESTIONER_31: How would you explain to them your desire to break up this country?
QUESTIONER_0: Yes, if you'd answer those two, please.
STURGEON: Firstly, on the point of EU membership, Scotland, whether we're in or out of the EU, wants to get its deficit down to sustainable levels.
STURGEON: Most countries across the Western world have deficits and we've set out plans to reduce that.
STURGEON: It is reducing already.
STURGEON: It's not a condition of joining the EU to meet those deficit levels.
STURGEON: I want to see more investment in Scotland from whoever is in government in Westminster, which is why I've set out the policies that the SNP would want to see pursued.
STURGEON: But our experience of Westminster governments over a long time is that that investment doesn't always come.
STURGEON: It's always also the case that if you want in Scotland to deprive Boris Johnson of a majority, then the way to do that is to vote SNP, because we're the main challengers in every Conservative seat.
STURGEON: On the issue of our grandparents, my grandmother was from the north of England.
STURGEON: I've got many family members in England.
STURGEON: I believe in independence so that Scotland can be self-governing.
STURGEON: But the closest ties of family, of history, social ties between Scotland, England, Wales, Northern Ireland, will always be close.
STURGEON: And I don't believe independence for Scotland is turning our backs on that.
STURGEON: It's simply making sure that Scotland
STURGEON: is in those relationships on the basis of equality.
STURGEON: And I think that's a good and positive thing for Scotland.
STURGEON: And actually, I think it would have benefits for the rest of the UK as well.
STURGEON: Let's take a question now from Stephen Whitelaw.
QUESTIONER_32: First Minister, on domestic matters, last year there was over 1,800 drug-related deaths in Scotland, the highest in Europe.
QUESTIONER_32: We are three times more likely to have a drug death in Scotland than elsewhere in England and Wales.
QUESTIONER_32: What are you doing about it and what needs to be done to reverse this trend?
STURGEON: That's a very good question.
STURGEON: Firstly, some context for that, as you're probably aware.
STURGEON: Scotland, because of our disproportionately high drug use back in the 1980s, there's an ageing cohort of drug users that have other health conditions, which is one, it's not the only reason, but it's one of the reasons for that rising number of drugs deaths.
STURGEON: It's a public health emergency.
STURGEON: It's not acceptable.
STURGEON: What we are doing about it, we're investing more money in drug treatment services.
STURGEON: We've established a
STURGEON: a task force made up of experts but also people with lived experience of drug use to look at the different, more innovative things that we need to do.
STURGEON: Power over the classification of drugs is still held at Westminster.
STURGEON: One of the things that Glasgow City Council
STURGEON: is wanting to do, and we are seeking the power in order to do that, is to establish in Glasgow what's called a safe consumption room, so that we can try to reduce some of the harm related to drugs.
STURGEON: But this is one of the most important issues that we're facing in Scotland, and I think there is a real...
STURGEON: I know there is a real determination, but I think it exists across parties to do absolutely that.
QUESTIONER_32: figures now indicate that on trend to actually be higher this year.
QUESTIONER_32: I think there's 500 odd drug deaths this year to date in relation to it.
QUESTIONER_32: So is the policies working just now?
STURGEON: There is more to do.
STURGEON: So some of these policies will be starting to have an effect, but it will take longer in some respects.
STURGEON: So I'm not going to stand here and make promises that I can't necessarily deliver in the year timescale that you're talking about.
STURGEON: What I can say
STURGEON: with absolute conviction is that there is a real determination to tackle this and to do what is required over whatever period is required.
STURGEON: I don't want, not just to be First Minister of a country, I don't want to be a citizen of a country in which we've got people dying unnecessarily of drug use.
STURGEON: If you take alcohol misuse, for example, which is not the same, we've
STURGEON: implemented, for example, minimum unit pricing.
STURGEON: So we have a record as a country of doing really courageous things when it comes to public health and we have got to show that same determination here too.
QUESTIONER_0: Is Jess Booth here somewhere?
QUESTIONER_0: Is that you?
QUESTIONER_0: I know from the questions you submitted you have personal experience of this.
QUESTIONER_33: I do.
QUESTIONER_33: I am a recovering addict.
QUESTIONER_33: I had an issue with benzodiazepines and
QUESTIONER_33: In the report that the gentleman's referenced up there, you talk about older people who have been through drug-related things in the 80s and things like that, but actually one of the biggest contributors to the rise in deaths is around benzodiazepines and the amount that they are
QUESTIONER_33: just prescribed to people who are in alcohol withdrawals or who are suffering from anxiety, suffering from mental health.
QUESTIONER_33: And there seems to be a real lack of education around what these drugs can do to people and how quickly it can ruin your life.
QUESTIONER_33: I came to the brink of death on these drugs.
QUESTIONER_33: And I'm one of the lucky ones.
QUESTIONER_33: And I feel like it is a situation that's not only being not really looked at properly in Scotland, but also throughout the whole of the UK.
STURGEON: Yeah, no, I think that is absolutely right.
STURGEON: And...
STURGEON: APPLAUSE Given your...
STURGEON: Excuse me a second.
STURGEON: Given your experience, if you were willing, I would love to talk to you a bit more and perhaps put you in touch with some of the people within the Scottish Government that are working on this, because it's really important that we do listen to people who have experience so that we can learn from that and make sure that the policies we're taking forward properly reflect that.
STURGEON: So, if you are willing to leave your details there, I would love to follow that up.
QUESTIONER_29: Yes, the woman here.
QUESTIONER_29: If you were in a coalition government, what would you do to make sure that those outside London are better represented in Westminster, not just Scottish people?
STURGEON: Well, that's a very good... Can I just clarify, firstly, not to dodge the question, because I'll come on to it.
STURGEON: I don't envisage being in a coalition government with Labour.
STURGEON: I think it would be a less formal arrangement than that, if we're in that situation.
STURGEON: But, you know,
STURGEON: many of the areas of England suffer from much the same neglect as Scotland does and much the same contempt from Westminster as Scotland does.
STURGEON: So the SNP will always try to stand up for decentralisation from London.
STURGEON: Much of what we have been able to do because we have a Scottish Parliament
STURGEON: some of the policies that Labour are now promising in their UK manifesto, I think with more power, with more devolution to some of the regions of England, would be possible there as well.
STURGEON: So the SNP will always be a voice for decentralisation and more powers to be spread around.
QUESTIONER_0: So how much...
QUESTIONER_0: So if you were in some kind of agreement, confidence supply, whatever it might be, with a Labour minority government, should that come to pass, how much involvement do you see, then, from that question, the SNP having in affairs south of the border?
QUESTIONER_0: Do you see yourself
QUESTIONER_0: actually getting stuck in, in terms of the laws that are passed for the rest of the UK?
STURGEON: No, we would always respect...
STURGEON: So we are responsible in Scotland for health policy and education, for example.
STURGEON: I don't think it's right that we would seek to... You know, no more right than it would be for Westminster to dictate to Scotland that we would dictate health policy or education policy in England, except where that affects Scotland, because often the decisions that are taken around Westminster on the health service, for example, have implications for our budget.
STURGEON: and one of the big issues in the next Parliament potentially for the health service is trade deals and we all have to come together those of us who don't want our NHS sold off to make sure that that doesn't happen so we will seek to exercise influence of course in Scotland's interest but where it is appropriate in the interests of people right across the UK.
QUESTIONER_34: Hello.
QUESTIONER_34: You have talked about economics and the deficit, and I know Scotland relies a lot, because in order to have your freedom, you are going to need money to do this.
QUESTIONER_34: You mentioned resources, and the North Sea is one of these key areas that is often raised.
QUESTIONER_34: Is it not important to let go of that now, to strand those assets and grow the natural resources like wind and tidal that Scotland is doing so much and raise the money that way rather than the oil and gas industry?
STURGEON: In a word, you are right, I agree with the sentiment.
STURGEON: If we were to stop oil and gas production tomorrow, we would become
STURGEON: more dependent on imports, which would actually increase the carbon footprint.
STURGEON: So we've got to have a managed transition and a just transition.
STURGEON: That transition is underway.
STURGEON: Rightly so, we've got to accelerate it.
STURGEON: We've got a net zero target in Scotland, in law already, of net zero emissions by 2045.
STURGEON: That's five years ahead of the rest of the UK.
STURGEON: So we've got to power on with these things and we're absolutely focused on doing it.
QUESTIONER_0: Right, well, there's been quite a few questions, but we, for the moment, are out of time.
QUESTIONER_0: So, First Minister Nicola Sturgeon, thank you very much indeed.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you.
QUESTIONER_0: Okay, so we are halfway through.
QUESTIONER_0: Two down, two to go.
QUESTIONER_0: Still got lots of energy?
QUESTIONER_0: Yes.
QUESTIONER_0: Oh, great.
QUESTIONER_0: Okay, so we're going to end with the Prime Minister, Boris Johnson, but first let's welcome the leader of the Liberal Democrats, Jo Swinson.
QUESTIONER_0: So welcome to this Leaders Question Time.
QUESTIONER_0: I'm going to make the same plea to you, you've probably heard it.
QUESTIONER_0: Same plea for brevity and relevance.
QUESTIONER_0: That's what we want, isn't it?
QUESTIONER_0: And if you've been watching, you'll know that the audience has a lot of questions and I'm sure you want to hear as much from them as possible.
QUESTIONER_0: Absolutely.
QUESTIONER_0: So, let's get stuck in.
QUESTIONER_0: So, our first question for you is from James McLaughlin.
QUESTIONER_16: Hiya, how you getting on?
QUESTIONER_16: Yeah, very well, thanks, James.
QUESTIONER_16: Do you regret starting off the campaign by saying that you could be PM and do you now agree how ridiculous that sounded?
SWINSON: But I've just started with the easy ones.
SWINSON: No, I don't regret it.
SWINSON: And I'll tell you why.
SWINSON: I think many of you might have watched that debate on Monday night between Boris Johnson and Jeremy Corbyn.
SWINSON: And I don't know how you felt about it, but when I watched that, I felt pretty dismayed with the thought that somehow that has to be the choice, that that's all that we get to choose between.
SWINSON: And I'm in the position of leading a political party that's standing in more than 600 seats at this election,
SWINSON: And I'm proud to say that you don't have to make a choice between Boris Johnson and Jeremy Corbyn.
SWINSON: There is a better alternative, because I truly believe that our country deserves a better and brighter future than what either of them is offering right now.
SWINSON: And I'm determined, in my role as Liberal Democrat leader, to do everything I possibly can to make that happen.
QUESTIONER_0: But are you still saying that you
QUESTIONER_0: could be Prime Minister, that's the heart of the question.
SWINSON: There's still three weeks left in this campaign and all I would say is to anybody that thinks that you can predict the outcome of the election in the middle of the campaign, ask Theresa May how that worked out last time round.
QUESTIONER_0: OK, but you would need a tsunami of seats, 314.
QUESTIONER_0: So to answer the gentleman's question, are you still saying that you could be Prime Minister?
SWINSON: I recognise that things have got much more challenging since Boris Johnson and Nigel Farage cooked up a deal to stitch up seats between them.
SWINSON: I get that it is a big ask, but I am absolutely fighting for every Liberal Democrat vote and for every Liberal Democrat seat.
SWINSON: And we do live in a world where sometimes strange things have happened in politics.
SWINSON: I didn't predict that Trump was going to become president.
SWINSON: I didn't think Jeremy Corbyn was going to become leader of the Labour Party.
SWINSON: So I think we've all made some predictions which have not turned out to come true.
QUESTIONER_0: OK, the woman in the red jacket.
QUESTIONER_35: talk about the Lib Dems as a viable alternative to Labour or the Tories.
QUESTIONER_35: I would just like to ask you, with 14 million UK citizens now living in poverty, do you regret consistently voting with the Conservatives in favour of harsh and uncaring benefit cuts?
QUESTIONER_35: And how does that put them as any kind of alternative to the Conservatives?
SWINSON: I mean, I absolutely recognise the issue that you're raising.
SWINSON: And the bottom line is that there are far, far too many people in our country living in poverty and life is too hard.
SWINSON: And we did not get everything right.
QUESTIONER_0: So should we just look at your voting record?
QUESTIONER_0: In government, you voted for the bedroom tax.
QUESTIONER_0: You frequently voted against raising benefits and frequently voted against paying higher benefits to people with illnesses or disabilities.
SWINSON: So as I was saying,
SWINSON: We didn't get everything right.
SWINSON: We also had plenty of fights with the Conservatives.
SWINSON: And we won some of those fights, and we lost some of those fights.
SWINSON: And I am sorry that we did not win more of those fights in coalition because of the reasons that you are outlining.
SWINSON: Now, we did stop the Conservatives cutting 12 billion more from welfare.
SWINSON: We did stop them bringing in the two-child cap, which they did, of course, when they were on their own in 2015.
SWINSON: But I absolutely think that we have lessons to learn from that.
SWINSON: I've learned those lessons.
SWINSON: And if you look at what we're setting out, we are identifying six billion extra to put into universal credit to make sure that you don't have that five-week wait, which is hurting so many people, so that we get rid of that two-child cap, that we get rid of the bedroom tax.
SWINSON: So I get it.
SWINSON: We got stuff wrong.
SWINSON: And we, in the future, going forward, are determined to get it right.
QUESTIONER_35: Does that satisfy you?
QUESTIONER_35: Not at all.
QUESTIONER_35: Not in the slightest bit.
QUESTIONER_35: You're still going to keep the universal credit, which everybody knows is not working at all.
QUESTIONER_35: The Labour Party has made it absolutely clear that they're going to get rid of universal credit, and quite right.
QUESTIONER_35: And I can't honestly say that I could ever trust, after what happened in Sheffield, and we know all about that in Sheffield, when the Lib Dems went into coalition with the Conservatives, how can we expect it to be believing anything you say on this issue?
SWINSON: I absolutely accept the way that you feel, and I might not be able to convince you on this, and I recognise that.
SWINSON: I do think that scrapping universal credit on its own isn't some kind of magic bullet.
SWINSON: We need to have a system that provides support to people.
SWINSON: I think the biggest problems with universal credit is the lack of money that's in it.
SWINSON: not the principle that you try to have a simpler benefit system instead of there being multiple different payments that creates more complexity.
SWINSON: So I think the principle of making it simpler is a good one, but it needs to have the money behind it, and that's what we're setting out to do.
QUESTIONER_0: Okay.
QUESTIONER_0: I want to do something slightly different.
QUESTIONER_0: I want to take two questions in a row from two named people.
QUESTIONER_0: So can I hear from Catherine Fox and then Sue Lenkovsky?
QUESTIONER_0: So Catherine, that's you over there, right.
QUESTIONER_36: Is revoking Article 50 confirming to 17.4 million people that you think we're stupid and didn't know what we were voting for?
QUESTIONER_37: Sue?
QUESTIONER_37: I'm a passionate Remainer.
QUESTIONER_37: But the Liberal Democrats standing on a manifesto to unilaterally cancel Brexit and the electoral pact has absolutely cost you my vote.
QUESTIONER_37: The Liberal Democratic Party title is now a misnomer.
QUESTIONER_37: How can you defend that decision?
SWINSON: So you've got an unhappy Lever and an unhappy Remainer.
SWINSON: OK. What I would say in terms of our policy, look, we are being very straightforward as a party that we want to stop Brexit.
SWINSON: You might agree with us.
SWINSON: You might disagree with us.
SWINSON: I don't think you could accuse us of not being upfront about wanting to stop Brexit.
SWINSON: We have been crystal clear about that from the very beginning.
SWINSON: Not for one second do I think that that means that you or anybody like you is stupid.
SWINSON: I think it means we disagree.
SWINSON: And I really want us to be in a situation in this country where we can disagree with each other, Catherine.
SWINSON: And that means that you want to leave.
SWINSON: And I don't think that makes you a bad person.
SWINSON: And I want to remain in the EU.
SWINSON: And I hope you think that doesn't make me a bad person.
QUESTIONER_36: You can disagree with me, but you lost.
QUESTIONER_36: You don't get to keep disagreeing, you don't get to change it because you lost.
SWINSON: Look, I haven't changed my view on whether I think we are better off in the European Union and watching what I have seen in the last three and a half years
SWINSON: watching in Parliament MPs who voted to leave, who want Brexit, unable to agree amongst themselves about what Brexit looks like.
SWINSON: So Theresa May proposes a Brexit that Boris Johnson doesn't think is Brexity enough.
SWINSON: Boris Johnson proposes a Brexit that first of all Nigel Farage says he can't handle, but then who knows what discussions they've had and what's been offered in order to get him on board.
SWINSON: If even those MPs who have been putting forward Brexit can't agree, I tell you, I genuinely don't have confidence that there is a majority in this country for any specific type of Brexit.
SWINSON: And when the government analysis says that Brexit will make our country poorer and it will mean people lose their jobs and there is less money for our NHS,
SWINSON: If we really don't think that there is a majority for any specific type of Brexit, I think it would be irresponsible to go ahead with that without at least checking.
SWINSON: So we've argued for a people's vote.
SWINSON: And in this election, we're saying if you vote Liberal Democrat and get a Lib Dem majority government, we will revoke Article 50.
SWINSON: And if you don't, we will argue for a people's vote.
SWINSON: So what do you say to your former Lib Dem voter here?
QUESTIONER_37: You're not saying we'll go back to the people, you are unilaterally saying revoke it.
QUESTIONER_37: That is undemocratic from somebody who wishes the last three and a half years had never happened.
QUESTIONER_37: There is no difference between the pair of us.
SWINSON: So, I suspect you want a people's vote.
QUESTIONER_37: That, to me, is the only way forward, recognising people who are strongly to leave.
SWINSON: So we have been leading the fight for a people's vote for three and a half years.
SWINSON: Yeah, but you're not now.
QUESTIONER_0: You're now leading the vote for revoking Article 50.
SWINSON: 17 times.
SWINSON: in Parliament, we put down amendments to try to secure a people's vote.
SWINSON: If Jeremy Corbyn and the Labour Party had backed that with sincerity, then we might be having a people's vote right now instead of a general election.
SWINSON: But we are in a general election.
SWINSON: This is the essence of democracy.
SWINSON: I am standing here and telling you honestly
SWINSON: what I would do if I was elected as Prime Minister, I would revoke Article 50 and if you vote me into that position, I will do what I've said I will do.
SWINSON: And that's the essence of democracy.
QUESTIONER_38: There are two women in the front here, let's hear from both of you.
QUESTIONER_38: You said you made some mistakes when you were in coalition with the Tories, so can you confirm whether you would go into a coalition with them again?
SWINSON: Certainly not under Boris Johnson.
SWINSON: This Conservative Party is off with Nigel Farage.
SWINSON: Boris Johnson's been endorsed by Tommy Robinson.
SWINSON: I mean, my goodness, they are so far off the charts.
SWINSON: Absolutely not.
QUESTIONER_0: There's a woman at the back who's had her hand up for ages, yes.
QUESTIONER_12: Hi, so you've admitted that you've made some mistakes, and I'm a student, so we've been let down by the Lib Dems before.
QUESTIONER_0: Are you talking about tuition fees, by any chance?
QUESTIONER_12: Yeah, that's what I was getting at.
QUESTIONER_12: But you also kind of called out Boris and Nigel for making a deal, but the Lib Dems have been making PACs, and there's definitely been some misleading suggestions in their campaign, so I don't... What's different now?
QUESTIONER_12: Why can we trust you now?
QUESTIONER_12: What do you mean, misleading suggestions in their campaign?
QUESTIONER_12: There's been some claims made that they...
QUESTIONER_0: It was a slightly unfortunate bar chart, wasn't there, Miss Swinson, in the North East Tyneside literature which suggested that we just kind of forgot all about the Brexit and the Labour Party in that bar chart and misrepresented the success of the Lib Dems in it.
SWINSON: I haven't seen that particular one, and it may well be that there was a problem with it.
SWINSON: I think all bar charts should be properly labelled.
SWINSON: It should be clear what they are explaining.
SWINSON: I'm a bit of a data geek.
SWINSON: I do like a bar chart.
SWINSON: I will be fairly straightforward about that.
SWINSON: But they often need to be right, don't they?
SWINSON: Sorry?
QUESTIONER_0: They need to be right.
SWINSON: And that one wasn't.
SWINSON: Yeah, they do need to be right and they need to be clear what it is representing.
SWINSON: I absolutely, absolutely take that point.
SWINSON: But I mean, on that wider issue of trust, look, we absolutely got it wrong on tuition fees and, you know, I do apologise that we got that wrong and that we did that.
SWINSON: What I think we have been doing in the last three and a half years
SWINSON: is standing really clearly as a pro-European, pro-Remain party.
SWINSON: And we've not wavered from that, we've absolutely set that out, and that is what is at the centre of our manifesto this time.
SWINSON: So you can see that we are sticking to our principles and what we believe in.
QUESTIONER_0: And do you think, just seeing the silence that that fell into, do you think that the policy of revoking Article 50 has backfired?
SWINSON: Well, do you know, it is what we would do if we win a majority.
SWINSON: Right?
SWINSON: I just think we have to level and be straightforward about it.
SWINSON: We are a pro-European party.
SWINSON: We always have been.
SWINSON: And if we fight an election on the basis of stopping Brexit and people give us a majority, don't be surprised if we then stop Brexit.
SWINSON: But as I say, we have led that campaign for a people's vote.
SWINSON: And we, with more Liberal Democrat MPs in the next Parliament, will campaign for a people's vote if we're not able to revoke.
QUESTIONER_0: Roman in the orange top.
QUESTIONER_39: And yeah, my question is, so if, for me, I'm a remainer, I voted to remain, I would like a people's vote.
QUESTIONER_39: But for me, the Liberal Democrats seem more interested in just arguing with rather than working in collaboration with other parties and other politicians.
QUESTIONER_39: So for me, I don't see the point.
QUESTIONER_0: Well, actually, why haven't you ruled out a coalition with Jeremy Corbyn, who, of course, was just standing here just a few moments ago?
QUESTIONER_0: When they had promised a second referendum, they are surely your best hope to remain.
SWINSON: Well, I mean, Jeremy Corbyn also stood here and said that he would be neutral in that referendum, so I don't think that we, and the millions of people who want to remain in this country, can trust Jeremy Corbyn on Brexit.
SWINSON: But the other exchange that you had, which I thought was a very powerful exchange,
SWINSON: was about what's happened in the Labour Party under Jeremy Corbyn in terms of anti-Semitism, that they are being investigated by the Equality and Human Rights Commission.
SWINSON: And he said he was happy about that.
SWINSON: I don't think a party leader should be happy about that.
SWINSON: I think you should be ashamed about that.
SWINSON: And I just don't think that we can ignore the genuine fear that
SWINSON: lots of people feel about Jeremy Corbyn being Prime Minister.
SWINSON: So when it comes to working collaboratively, absolutely.
SWINSON: And what does that mean?
SWINSON: Let's just look at what we've done over the last couple of years, right?
SWINSON: We are here, it is November.
SWINSON: we are still members of the European Union.
SWINSON: And we were supposed to leave on the 29th of March, and we were supposed to leave on the 31st of October, and for people that wanted to leave, if that was you, then I appreciate you're going to be frustrated by that, but as a party that wanted to stop Brexit, we have worked collaboratively to make that happen.
SWINSON: We've worked with people in the Labour Party, in the Conservative Party, in the SNP, in Plaid Cymru and the Greens.
SWINSON: We have worked week in, week out, and we have stopped Brexit twice
SWINSON: Just imagine if you elect more Liberal Democrat MPs what we will be able to achieve and we'll be able to stop Brexit for good.
QUESTIONER_0: There's a forest of hands.
QUESTIONER_0: I'm going to go around a few people at once if that's all right by you.
QUESTIONER_0: Yes, the woman here in the black top.
QUESTIONER_40: You talk a lot about working collaboratively with other parties, but your policy, in the unlikely event that you were elected Prime Minister with a majority, your policy of revoking Article 50 is just as divisive as the policies that are coming out from the hard Brexiteers.
QUESTIONER_40: How would you possibly imagine that you would be able to bring the country together if you were elected and you revoked Article 50?
QUESTIONER_40: the views of all those people that voted to leave.
QUESTIONER_40: I'm a Remain voter, but I come from a constituency, Rother Valley, that voted strongly to leave.
QUESTIONER_40: How would you bring communities like that together under your government?
QUESTIONER_0: The man here in the blue shirt.
QUESTIONER_0: Yes, you.
QUESTIONER_41: I hear you talk about concern for the poor, but the reason people are poor is because of austerity, which you supported.
QUESTIONER_41: Your deputy leader recently said that he wants the government to run a permanent surplus, which is essentially a more palatable way of saying permanent austerity.
QUESTIONER_41: Why should we trust you not to further cripple our public services?
QUESTIONER_0: And the man there in the grey shirt.
QUESTIONER_42: We've apologised to students for the student debt debacle.
QUESTIONER_42: We haven't said what you're going to do for them.
QUESTIONER_42: So students are leaving with 50 grand worth of debt.
QUESTIONER_42: They're paying interest from the time they start to study when they can't possibly pay it back.
QUESTIONER_42: They're paying over 6% in interest when they're lucky enough to get a job.
QUESTIONER_42: We've created a generation of graduates who are in persistent debt to the state.
QUESTIONER_42: It just doesn't hang true.
QUESTIONER_42: So what are you going to do for those people?
QUESTIONER_42: We've created a whole generation in persistent debt.
QUESTIONER_0: OK, so three completely different topics there.
SWINSON: So, I absolutely recognise that so many people feel that this division that we have in our country right now is really horrible, it's really uncomfortable, right?
SWINSON: In this room, there's people who are Leave, Remain and so on, and I'm sure we all feel uncomfortable about that, and we kind of crave for and long for a feeling where that isn't there.
SWINSON: All I would say is I don't think there's an easy answer to this.
SWINSON: In Scotland, we've been living with this now for eight years because of the run-up to the independence referendum, and the society is still very divided on those lines.
SWINSON: So I don't think there's a quick fix, but I do think that many of the issues which people are unhappy about, that things don't...
SWINSON: things are too tough, that, you know, the economy doesn't work well enough for people.
SWINSON: I genuinely fear that those are going to be made worse by leaving the European Union.
SWINSON: There's going to be less money about it.
SWINSON: I mean, to take up the point about austerity, you know... Because what this questioner is saying is that you will make austerity worse by running a budget surplus.
SWINSON: But what my point is, is that...
SWINSON: it's leaving the European Union that is going to unleash austerity on our country because we are going to be poorer, people are going to lose their jobs, there will be less money for our NHS and it will be worse, whereas if we remain then we will actually have more money to spend to be able to invest in our communities and in resolving many of the issues that people are unhappy about.
SWINSON: So, you know, that's why I'm standing on that platform to say I want things to be better in our country because I recognise that for too many people it has been
SWINSON: I think that's a really good point.
SWINSON: I think that's a really good point.
SWINSON: I think that's a really good point.
SWINSON: But I'm not going to stand here and promise that we're going to abolish tuition fees.
SWINSON: There's a lot of numbers that are getting thrown around by different parties in this election.
SWINSON: And a lot of the stuff sounds good, but can it actually be delivered?
SWINSON: Do you actually, in your heart of hearts, believe that those sums add up when the IFS says that it's just not credible when you look at the Labour manifesto?
SWINSON: So I'd rather be straightforward and honest with people.
QUESTIONER_42: I think they should pay something, but I just think the balance is totally out of sync.
QUESTIONER_42: We need to help these people.
QUESTIONER_42: It's not about not paying anything, as the Labour government are suggesting.
QUESTIONER_42: There needs to be a rebalance.
QUESTIONER_42: So what is that rebalance?
SWINSON: Yeah, and I think we need to look at how we invest in supporting particularly people from low incomes going into university to get more people doing that.
SWINSON: But if we really want to improve life chances,
SWINSON: the best place to put that money is in the early years and in schools, that's how you get that social mobility, that's how you give young people opportunities and that's where the priority for our spending is going, it's to make sure that we give our schools the money they need.
SWINSON: I mean at the moment in schools, right, you've got
SWINSON: teachers being sacked, you've got some schools not opening all day on a Friday, you've got schools crowdfunding for print sticks and exercise books.
SWINSON: I mean, if that doesn't tell you that our schools are in dire need of more funding, what does?
QUESTIONER_0: OK, let's take a question from Aldous Everard.
QUESTIONER_0: Whereabouts are you?
QUESTIONER_0: Ah, there you are.
QUESTIONER_24: Hi.
QUESTIONER_24: I'm sure that the Liberal Democrats feel as if you must feel like you're in a bit between a rock and a hard place at the moment.
QUESTIONER_24: But I'm just wondering, would your conscience be clear if, as a result of dividing the Remain vote,
QUESTIONER_24: between Labour, semi-Remain, I know, but we've got that next referendum with them.
QUESTIONER_24: If you divide that Remain vote, will your conscience be clear if the Tories manage to get a majority as a result of that?
SWINSON: If you vote for Boris Johnson, he will use that vote to put through his hard Brexit deal.
SWINSON: If you vote for Jeremy Corbyn, he will use that vote to negotiate a Labour Brexit deal.
SWINSON: In this election, my conscience would not be clear if I didn't make sure that right across the country, people have the chance to vote for a Remain party, for a candidate that wants to stop Brexit, because this might be the last chance that we have to stop it.
QUESTIONER_24: I fully agree.
QUESTIONER_24: I am a Remainer as well, but I don't want
QUESTIONER_24: this country not to go out of...
QUESTIONER_24: I would rather that we went out of Europe than we didn't have another referendum.
QUESTIONER_24: We need to have another referendum because we need to heal those wounds that have been caused by the initial referendum, which was so poorly worked out and which has been incredibly divisive for the country, for everyone.
SWINSON: And can I just say that, obviously, if there's more Liberal Democrats in that next Parliament, then that gives us more power to deliver that.
SWINSON: But we also need to make sure
SWINSON: to get there, that we stop Boris Johnson getting a majority.
SWINSON: And it's Liberal Democrats who are able to win seats from Boris Johnson and the Tories.
SWINSON: There's lots of places in the country where that can happen.
SWINSON: From what we're seeing, it's not the case that Jeremy Corbyn and the Labour Party are going to be able to win seats from the Conservatives.
SWINSON: And that's why voting Liberal Democrat is the way to deprive Boris Johnson of a majority.
SWINSON: The man in the red tie.
QUESTIONER_43: I've heard you this evening trying to defend your record on your vote and then on the other hand you'll say how you know you're against these horrible Tory cuts and I really really can't trust you and you got one difficult question and you immediately tried to turn it around to anti-semitism.
QUESTIONER_43: Jeremy Corbyn has been fighting anti-semitism and racism in all its forms since before you were born and you've got some brass neck to stand up there and call him an anti-semite.
SWINSON: I recognise that you genuinely believe that, but let me say, from the people that I've spoken to in the Labour Party, when I speak to Luciana Berger who joined the Liberal Democrats, when I speak to Louise Ellman who felt that she had to leave the Labour Party, and when I speak to Jewish people right across the country,
SWINSON: They do not feel.
SWINSON: They do not feel that Jeremy Corbyn is fighting racism and anti-Semitism in the Labour Party.
SWINSON: They know what that feels like.
SWINSON: And I'm going to listen to them and trust them on this issue.
QUESTIONER_0: Let's take a question now from Magdalene Lake.
QUESTIONER_0: Where's Magdalene?
QUESTIONER_0: Oh, there you are.
QUESTIONER_44: Having voted a number of times for fracking, how can we be sure of your commitment to halting climate change?
SWINSON: Well, and against fracking.
SWINSON: So why did you vote against a ban on it in 2015?
SWINSON: So, when we were in the coalition government, my Liberal Democrat colleague Ed Davey was the Energy Secretary and he put in place very stringent regulation.
QUESTIONER_0: Yes, you're a deputy now, of course.
SWINSON: Indeed.
SWINSON: But as a party, things have moved on.
SWINSON: That was four years ago.
SWINSON: We are against fracking.
SWINSON: We want a ban on fracking because the climate emergency is such that we shouldn't be starting new fossil fuel industries.
SWINSON: We need to be changing the way that we produce our energy, the way that we heat our homes.
SWINSON: We need to be getting the carbon out of our everyday lives rapidly.
SWINSON: And that means no new fossil fuel industries such as fracking.
QUESTIONER_0: So you won't change your mind again, given that you voted against it, a ban on it in 2015.
QUESTIONER_0: You're now saying that you do think it should be banned.
QUESTIONER_0: You're not going to change your mind again.
SWINSON: I'm very clear.
SWINSON: We would ban fracking.
QUESTIONER_44: This is like all the other policies that you have.
QUESTIONER_44: They're Labour policies, and you are going on the back of what Labour are doing.
QUESTIONER_44: You say that you'll do progressive policies, like childcare and Sure Start and all that kind of stuff.
QUESTIONER_44: But you voted against it.
QUESTIONER_44: You voted against it when you were in Tory government.
QUESTIONER_44: You particularly, you yourself, have voted against progressive politics.
QUESTIONER_44: And every time you are asked about something, you attack Labour.
QUESTIONER_44: And you pretend to be
QUESTIONER_44: somebody who is akin to Labour in some of those progressive policies.
QUESTIONER_44: Well, I don't believe it.
QUESTIONER_44: I don't think that you have progressive policies.
QUESTIONER_44: I don't think that you have left-wing policies.
QUESTIONER_44: I think that actually the Liberal Democrats are right-wing party and they do not get my vote.
SWINSON: And if you support the Labour Party and if you want socialism and that's your viewpoint, then we're not a socialist party.
SWINSON: I'm a liberal.
SWINSON: And it's not some annex to the Labour Party.
SWINSON: a liberal party.
SWINSON: We want an open and a fair and inclusive country.
SWINSON: We're an internationalist party.
SWINSON: That's why we want to remain in the European Union and stop Brexit, because we believe that you get further, you achieve more if you work with your closest neighbours.
SWINSON: That's what we are standing for.
SWINSON: That's what our values are.
SWINSON: And sometimes we do agree with the Labour Party, but we are not the Labour Party.
SWINSON: We are a different party.
SWINSON: And that's why we're standing separately.
SWINSON: We stand on our own two feet in this election.
SWINSON: The woman right at the back there.
QUESTIONER_45: Hiya.
QUESTIONER_45: I just kind of want to follow up about the whole climate change because recently on this week you said you would be OK with using nuclear weapons.
QUESTIONER_45: Can you please clarify why you think that would be OK and how is that going to protect the planet?
SWINSON: APPLAUSE So...
SWINSON: We live in a really dangerous world.
SWINSON: I think it feels like it is a much more uncertain world than even a few years ago, when you have President Trump in the White House with his volatile decisions in geopolitics.
SWINSON: I don't think this is the time to get rid of our nuclear deterrent.
SWINSON: I think that we need to keep our nuclear deterrent and that it keeps us safe.
SWINSON: I do think the best use for nuclear weapons is to use them to negotiate away other nuclear weapons.
SWINSON: And the UK should be playing a leading role in all of those international diplomatic discussions about how do we create a world without nuclear weapons, because that is what we want to see.
SWINSON: But we are not there.
SWINSON: And while we are not there, then I do not want us to scrap our deterrent.
SWINSON: Merlin, the blue shirt.
QUESTIONER_46: You seem to be the party of missed opportunity.
QUESTIONER_46: When you were in coalition with the Conservatives, you failed to stop them doing a number of things you would now reverse.
QUESTIONER_46: When the Conservatives were heavily in minority in government just recently, you failed to
QUESTIONER_46: put your pride to one side, team up with Corbyn and the others, and bring down the government, and then bring forward a referendum.
QUESTIONER_46: We don't have to have a selection.
QUESTIONER_46: We could have avoided it.
SWINSON: I have to disagree.
SWINSON: Just a couple of weeks before this election was called, the Liberal Democrats tabled again an amendment to have a people's vote and the Labour Party refused to back it.
SWINSON: We have been consistent in doing that and we did achieve more money for poorer pupils, we achieved same-sex marriage, we cut taxes,
SWINSON: for people on low pay.
SWINSON: We introduced shared parental leave and gender pay gap reporting.
SWINSON: You know there was a whole host of things that we did achieve when we were in government and I always want us to do more and that's why I'm ambitious for our future because our country can have a brighter future and it starts with remaining in the European Union.
QUESTIONER_0: Our time is up I'm afraid Miss Swinson.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you very much indeed.
QUESTIONER_0: Would you please thank Jo Swinson.
QUESTIONER_0: OK, are you still with us?
QUESTIONER_0: Because it is now the last of our four leaders.
QUESTIONER_0: Would you please welcome the leader of the Conservative Party and, of course, the Prime Minister, Boris Johnson.
QUESTIONER_0: Right, so, if you've been watching the programme so far, I expect you have.
QUESTIONER_47: Quite a lot of it.
QUESTIONER_0: Wrapped with attention, you'll have heard me ask each leader to allow the audience time to ask as many questions as possible, so to keep your answers relevant and reasonably brief, and forgive me for interrupting you if you don't.
QUESTIONER_0: So, let's take our first question for Mr Johnson, which is from Mae Rooks.
QUESTIONER_48: Hello, Prime Minister.
QUESTIONER_48: I'd just like to ask you, how important is it for someone in your position of power to always tell the truth?
JOHNSON: I think it's absolutely vital.
JOHNSON: I think it's absolutely vital, and I think that the issue of trust in politics is central to this election and fundamental to the corrosion of trust in politics at the moment.
JOHNSON: So why do you think you're being asked that question?
JOHNSON: Let's be clear.
JOHNSON: It's the failure of politicians to deliver Brexit.
JOHNSON: Because the people of the EU...
JOHNSON: Hang on.
JOHNSON: Hang on a minute.
QUESTIONER_0: People were told 3.5 years ago... Just a minute, Prime Minister.
QUESTIONER_48: I'm sorry.
QUESTIONER_48: Is that what you meant?
QUESTIONER_48: Erm...
QUESTIONER_48: I'm speaking from a WASPs and you know who the WASPs are and you've made statements to help and take that forward.
QUESTIONER_48: Are you still in that frame of mind that you're going to help us out?
QUESTIONER_48: You're going to sort this pension issue?
JOHNSON: Well, the WASPI issue, as everybody knows, is a very difficult problem caused by a change in the pension age for women who retire at a certain age.
JOHNSON: And I do sympathise deeply with the position of the WASPI women.
JOHNSON: And we have looked at it and looked at it and looked at it.
JOHNSON: I would love to be able to magic you any solution.
JOHNSON: But are you going to take action apart from looking?
JOHNSON: It is very expensive to come up with the solution that you want.
JOHNSON: And I'm going to be honest with you tonight.
JOHNSON: I cannot promise that I can magic up that money for you tonight.
JOHNSON: All the demands that the WASP women make.
JOHNSON: We are going to look at it, but it is not possible to satisfy all the demands of the WASP women.
JOHNSON: I'm going to put my hands up and confess that.
QUESTIONER_0: A few points, if I may.
QUESTIONER_0: It's about three or four.
QUESTIONER_0: Can we start with you?
QUESTIONER_22: I think it's the most important point of this general election.
QUESTIONER_22: Why are you refusing to release the report on Russian interference in British politics?
QUESTIONER_0: Because...
QUESTIONER_0: If I may, I'm going to take three or four points at a time.
QUESTIONER_0: Yes.
QUESTIONER_49: Why should you be Prime Minister if you constantly keep on avoiding scrutiny?
QUESTIONER_49: You've cancelled Parliament for five weeks, you ran away from Channel 4's debate, which is meant to be this Sunday, and you've banned the Daily Mirror from the Conservative bus.
QUESTIONER_49: The woman here in the blue dress.
QUESTIONER_50: You keep saying that leave is the will of the people, but I don't think I've ever heard you address specific issues bringing into question the validity of the referendum.
QUESTIONER_50: For example, we know that the Leave campaign broke electoral spending rules and privacy laws.
QUESTIONER_50: We know that many people voted to leave based on wrong information, including what was written on the side of a bus.
QUESTIONER_50: We know that leave was not defined and still isn't actually agreed upon today and I'd love for you to address these issues and also actually talk about why you think you've got a mandate to go through with Brexit because I don't think you can say that this general election can be your mandate when Brexit is mixed in with healthcare and climate change and education.
JOHNSON: I am very happy to be scrutinised.
JOHNSON: On your point about the reasons for having the election, let's be in no doubt, I did not want to have an election now and no Prime Minister wants to have an election on 12 December.
JOHNSON: We had to do it because Parliament is blocking Brexit.
JOHNSON: I'm afraid...
JOHNSON: Hang on, that's not quite right.
QUESTIONER_0: Parliament voted to accept a reading of your bill.
QUESTIONER_0: They then didn't want to do it in just three days.
JOHNSON: Well, they were given every opportunity to pass it.
JOHNSON: They were given every opportunity to pass it and they passed a law to insist that we extended beyond October the 31st.
JOHNSON: And what we have now is a situation in which the other three party leaders
JOHNSON: either want to block Brexit or absurdly want to have a second referendum on the EU without... And that's, I think, Mr Corbyn's position.
JOHNSON: It seems to have mutated tonight.
JOHNSON: He's now going to be neutral on the deal that he proposes to do.
JOHNSON: I don't see how he can do a deal when he's going to be neutral or indifferent about the deal that he wants to do.
JOHNSON: Never mind that.
JOHNSON: I do not think whatever deal Mr Corbyn proposes...
JOHNSON: I don't think it's sensible.
JOHNSON: for this great country of ours to spend next year in yet more delectable disputations about the EU, and then another referendum, if I understood correctly what happened earlier on, another referendum on Scotland.
JOHNSON: How can that be right for our country?
JOHNSON: I want next year to be a fantastic year for our country.
JOHNSON: We're a very ambitious, one-nation Conservative government.
JOHNSON: We have amazing plans for this country, investing in education, investing in health, and that's what we want to get on with, and we need to get Brexit done to do it.
QUESTIONER_0: it.
QUESTIONER_0: It took about three minutes to get that phrase in.
QUESTIONER_47: Mr Johnson, whilst you claim the economy is doing really well, how can you justify, for example in my constituency where I work as a senior leader in a secondary school, how can you justify that 40%
QUESTIONER_47: of the children in my community are living in poverty.
QUESTIONER_47: And nationally, many, many more people are homeless.
QUESTIONER_47: And many people who are working, perhaps on 40-hour contracts a week, are having to use food banks.
QUESTIONER_47: So how can you justify this?
JOHNSON: whereabouts is your school?
QUESTIONER_47: In Stannington, towards Hillsworth, Sheffield.
JOHNSON: I want you to know that I have been in office for about 120 days or so as Prime Minister.
JOHNSON: I do understand, I have been to many hospitals and many schools in the time I have been Prime Minister.
JOHNSON: I have talked to nurses and doctors and teachers about what is going on in their schools.
JOHNSON: That is why I
JOHNSON: We're now levelling up funding for education across this country, putting more money into both primary and secondary schools, and I want to see that going directly to your school.
JOHNSON: But I just make the crucial point...
QUESTIONER_0: But Mr Johnson, this is a question about your record.
QUESTIONER_0: You say you've been Prime Minister for about 120 days, which of course is true, but the Conservatives have been in power for nine years.
JOHNSON: Yes, absolutely.
JOHNSON: That is a fair point, Fiona.
JOHNSON: For most of that time, I was running London.
JOHNSON: When I was running London, we reduced the gap between rich and poor.
JOHNSON: and one of the things I did, which we have now brought into government, we introduced the Living Wage, we massively expanded the Living Wage when I was Mayor of London.
JOHNSON: That became a national policy.
JOHNSON: George Osborne nicked it from me, an act of theft, I was perfectly happy to condone, and it has become a national policy.
JOHNSON: I am proud to say
JOHNSON: that under us Conservatives, we're going to raise the living wage to its highest ever level.
JOHNSON: And I guess if you ask me, do I want to tackle poverty in your area?
JOHNSON: Yes, I certainly do.
JOHNSON: And yes, I certainly want to give every kid in the country the opportunities to make the most of their talents.
JOHNSON: And that is what I believe in passionately as a Conservative.
JOHNSON: I want to see equality of opportunity in this country.
JOHNSON: I believe that you have talent, genius, ability,
JOHNSON: uniformly distributed throughout the whole of the UK.
JOHNSON: OK.
JOHNSON: I'm going to get them on side with one like that, I don't think.
JOHNSON: To unleash that potential.
JOHNSON: OK. That's what I want to do.
QUESTIONER_0: Let's hear from Sandeep.
QUESTIONER_0: Sandeep Gill, whereabouts?
QUESTIONER_0: Yes.
QUESTIONER_0: Oh, there you are.
QUESTIONER_51: Firstly, Mr Johnson, I'd like to say, whilst you're in South Yorkshire, I hope you managed to stay dry, unlike a lot of the residents in the past month.
QUESTIONER_51: So...
QUESTIONER_51: As a working single mother, I rely on benefits to get by and just about manage to sustain myself and my two children.
QUESTIONER_51: Under the Conservative government, what guarantee do I have of staying on this side of the food banks?
JOHNSON: We will... First of all, about the flooding, I'm very, very determined to make sure that everybody whose lives have been affected by flooding gets the compensation and the help that they need.
JOHNSON: You've seen our announcement that every damaged home is going to get at least £5,000 to help them with repairs.
JOHNSON: in addition to what we're doing to help with council tax and other things.
JOHNSON: And we'll also help with insurance.
JOHNSON: But on your basic question about tackling poverty, of course we want to deal with not just the expression of poverty, but also with the causes of poverty.
JOHNSON: and that means dealing with educational standards.
JOHNSON: It means spreading ambition and hope around the country by investing in education, investing in social services, adult and child social services as we are now.
JOHNSON: Also, it's not just a question of the living wage, it's also a question of helping people with the cost of living.
JOHNSON: and that's why we're cutting national insurance contributions and trying to put more... doing things to help people with the cost of their heating, their fuel bills, and putting more money into people's pockets every year.
JOHNSON: We want to help people with the cost of living.
JOHNSON: How much is cutting those national insurance levels?
JOHNSON: How much is that going to save people every week?
QUESTIONER_0: How much is that going to save people every week?
JOHNSON: I agree, it's only £100 a year to begin with.
QUESTIONER_0: £100 a year?
JOHNSON: But it's £500 a year.
JOHNSON: It's £500 a year once we've got to our ambition.
QUESTIONER_0: You say it's £500, but it's under £100.
JOHNSON: Once we've got to our ambition of £12,500.
JOHNSON: I want to do more to reduce the tax burden.
JOHNSON: Hang on, let's let Sandeep back in.
JOHNSON: Sorry, Sandeep.
QUESTIONER_51: You're promising that, yet I'm yet to be moved on to universal credit.
QUESTIONER_51: How does that work?
QUESTIONER_51: I'm going to lose money, and yet you're promising more relief in other areas.
QUESTIONER_51: It doesn't make sense.
JOHNSON: Well, Sandy, I'm very happy to talk afterwards about what we can do to help your specific case, but I do think that universal...
JOHNSON: I know that some people want to scrap universal credit without putting anything in its place.
JOHNSON: It has worked in the sense that it has helped many
JOHNSON: a couple of hundred thousand people at least into work.
JOHNSON: And one of the features of the economy at the moment, whatever the problems we have, is that we have more people in employment than ever before.
JOHNSON: We have more women in the workforce than ever before.
JOHNSON: And actually incomes are starting to grow faster than any time in the last 12 years.
JOHNSON: And that is what we want to focus on.
QUESTIONER_0: The man at the back in the grey suit.
QUESTIONER_52: Hello Mr Johnson, my name is Dylan, I'm a student at the University of Manchester and I just wanted to ask you, why should a young person between 18 and 25 years old vote for the Conservative Party without using campaign rhetoric?
QUESTIONER_52: Just straight answer please.
JOHNSON: because I believe that we are the party that is going to do the most to help you to get a fantastic high-wage, high-skilled job... What about all the debt I'm about to graduate with?
JOHNSON: And help you to get a home by building record numbers of homes, help you to get onto the housing ladder,
JOHNSON: With great respect, sir, we built a record number last year and we have a plan to build a million homes in the next five years.
QUESTIONER_0: Hang on, hang on, hang on a minute.
QUESTIONER_0: I think there's so much groaning here.
QUESTIONER_0: I assume you're thinking of the Conservative pledge to build 200,000 starter homes in 2014 and none of those have been built.
JOHNSON: No, well, actually, if you look at what we've done just last year, we built 240,000 homes, which was more than any year in the last 31 years bar one.
JOHNSON: And of those, 57,000 were affordable homes.
JOHNSON: I don't want to go on my record.
JOHNSON: If you look at my record as Mayor of London, we outbuilt Labour by miles when I was Mayor of London.
JOHNSON: We will build the homes for young people growing up in this country.
JOHNSON: We will also make sure that they have the jobs to go to.
JOHNSON: And we will...
JOHNSON: I'll answer that.
QUESTIONER_0: that's not the second time he's asked it.
JOHNSON: If he's allowed to shout out like that, I'm perfectly happy to answer it.
JOHNSON: And we will, just to complete this point, and we will put in the transport infrastructure that, as I say, and improving education, that will allow us to unite and level up this country.
JOHNSON: That is what I want to do.
QUESTIONER_0: The question was, when will you release the Russian report?
QUESTIONER_0: So this is the report into whether or not there was Russian interference or any kind of...
JOHNSON: There is absolutely no evidence that I know of...
JOHNSON: If that's the case, then why not release it?
JOHNSON: ..to show any interference in any British electoral event.
JOHNSON: And the reason I won't is I see no reason, or the reason I decided not to ages ago, is because I see no reason to interfere with a normal timetable
JOHNSON: The normal timetable...
JOHNSON: Hold on, that's not true.
JOHNSON: That is not true.
QUESTIONER_22: That is not true.
QUESTIONER_22: Dominic Grieve said it should have been released on October 28th.
QUESTIONER_22: It was on your desk on October 17th.
QUESTIONER_22: What do you make of this response?
JOHNSON: Well, I understand it.
JOHNSON: I understand it and I...
QUESTIONER_21: OK, no, no, please, you have to let Mr Johnson answer.
JOHNSON: This is real...
JOHNSON: I'm sorry to say, and with great respect, this is complete Bermuda Triangle stuff, there is no... As is the suggestion...
JOHNSON: If that's the case.
JOHNSON: As is the suggestion that the referendum, when 17.4 million people voted to leave, was somehow false, vitiated, not fair, wrong, and should now be cancelled.
JOHNSON: I don't think that is true.
JOHNSON: My strong view is that the people of this country voted to leave.
JOHNSON: they've waited three and a half years to get that done.
JOHNSON: I think at least the Liberal Democrats are saying scrub the referendum.
JOHNSON: That's my impression.
JOHNSON: Aren't they saying revoke Article 50?
QUESTIONER_0: Forgive me.
QUESTIONER_0: We've had an answer to that.
QUESTIONER_0: Otherwise, we'll spend the next 15 minutes talking about this report.
QUESTIONER_0: It may be to you, and I respect that, but we've had an awful lot of other questions, and I'd like to take one now from Olive Enokido.
QUESTIONER_0: Forgive me.
QUESTIONER_0: This is not just for you, this whole session.
QUESTIONER_0: No, I'm sorry.
QUESTIONER_0: I'm sorry.
QUESTIONER_0: You're going to have to stop there.
QUESTIONER_0: Otherwise, it's just not fair on everyone else who've got their hands up.
QUESTIONER_0: It just becomes an evening just for you, and that's not right.
QUESTIONER_0: So let's hear from... No, let's hear...
QUESTIONER_0: I think you've got as much of an answer as you're going to get.
QUESTIONER_0: Can we hear...
QUESTIONER_0: Hang on a minute.
QUESTIONER_0: Hang on a minute.
QUESTIONER_0: I am in charge of this thing.
QUESTIONER_0: Can you just wait a minute?
QUESTIONER_0: Can we hear now...
QUESTIONER_0: APPLAUSE ..from Olive Enokido-Lynam?
QUESTIONER_0: Olive, yes.
QUESTIONER_53: Hi, Prime Minister.
QUESTIONER_53: Racist rhetoric in this country is completely rife.
QUESTIONER_53: Will you admit that you have personally contributed to this and say the words, I'm sorry?
JOHNSON: Well, I just want to...
JOHNSON: I want to say, yeah.
JOHNSON: I want to say...
JOHNSON: No, I want to say, look, I've written many millions of words in my life as a journalist and I've never intended, I genuinely never intended to cause hurt or pain to anybody.
JOHNSON: And that is my intention.
JOHNSON: What I will say, because I think you're referring to a particular article of a year or so ago, more than that.
QUESTIONER_0: Well, in fairness, there's a few articles.
QUESTIONER_0: So there's the Muslim women going around looking like letterboxes, which was last year.
QUESTIONER_0: You referred to tribal warriors with watermelon smiles and flag waving, picking innies.
QUESTIONER_0: And then just to get another demographic in, tank-topped bumboys.
JOHNSON: You know, if you go through all my articles with a fine-tooth comb and take out individual phrases, there is no doubt that you can find things that can be made to seem offensive.
JOHNSON: And, of course... And I understand that.
JOHNSON: I understand that, but what I will say... Do you not think bubble is offensive?
JOHNSON: Just on the point that I think the lady was referring to... Olive.
JOHNSON: Olive was referring to.
JOHNSON: I defend my right to speak out, and I do defend my right to... And if you actually read the piece, which I don't know how many people have, if you read the piece, what I was really doing...
JOHNSON: Which one?
JOHNSON: I suggest you read any of them.
JOHNSON: or all of them.
JOHNSON: What I was really doing was mounting a strong liberal defence of the right of women in this country to wear what they choose.
JOHNSON: And I think most people, and not to be oppressed into wearing something they don't want to wear.
JOHNSON: And I think most people in this country would agree with that.
QUESTIONER_0: So, I'll just ask if you're going to, if you'll say I'm sorry, but...
JOHNSON: I have to get back to my fundamental point.
JOHNSON: I have always stood up for gender equality.
JOHNSON: If you look at the way I ran City Hall, I had a roughly half-and-half male-female team.
JOHNSON: The number one campaign I ran as Foreign Secretary was for 12 years of quality education for every girl in the world, which, by the way,
JOHNSON: is the single best and most beautiful thing we could do to solve the problems of this planet.
JOHNSON: And the UK is leading on it.
JOHNSON: And I'm very proud, as a former foreign secretary, to have championed that agenda.
QUESTIONER_0: There's a lot of people with hands up and some women, so let's hear from you.
QUESTIONER_26: Hi, Mr Johnson.
QUESTIONER_26: My question is about the NHS, but I'd just like to back Apollo's point.
QUESTIONER_26: You just talk about defending the freedoms of women.
QUESTIONER_26: You don't do that by taking down a religious minority.
QUESTIONER_26: You don't do that by offending Muslim women.
QUESTIONER_26: That's not how you ensure equality for all.
QUESTIONER_36: Can we come on to the NHS a little bit later, if that's all right?
QUESTIONER_0: Because we may come to that.
QUESTIONER_0: Let's just stay on the subject for a moment, if that's OK. Oh, on the NHS.
QUESTIONER_0: Well, I'm going to come to the NHS in a moment, so if you'll forgive me.
QUESTIONER_0: There's a question here.
QUESTIONER_54: I think the way that you speak about Muslim women in particular and the way that you've spoken about race in the past is completely characteristic of the way your government has dealt with all the issues it's come across since 2010.
QUESTIONER_54: It's been characterised by complete carelessness, by callousness, the way you treated people through the DWP, the way you treated the victims of Grenfell, the hostile environment.
QUESTIONER_54: It's completely... You say you visited hospitals and you've spoken to public service workers.
QUESTIONER_54: But I think you yourself know you haven't been welcome when you've been to speak to them.
QUESTIONER_54: The way you've conducted yourself when you've been there has shown that you're afraid of the response you're going to get.
QUESTIONER_54: So I think it's insulting to the people who've suffered under your government.
QUESTIONER_54: Even if you say you've only been in power for 100 days, you've been part of the government for the last nine years.
QUESTIONER_54: I think it's completely insulting for you to stand there and talk about all the investment you're going to bring, when it's your austerity policies that have brought...
JOHNSON: Well, you know.
JOHNSON: All I can say to you is to repeat what I've said.
JOHNSON: Actually, in this party, in the Conservative Party, unlike other parties, we have zero tolerance of Islamophobia.
JOHNSON: We do.
JOHNSON: And people are asked to stand down if they're guilty of Islamophobia or any other prejudice or any other hate speech.
JOHNSON: And that is what we... That's what we do.
JOHNSON: And I'm delighted.
JOHNSON: And we are going to have an inquiry into prejudice of all kinds.
JOHNSON: question.
QUESTIONER_0: You are not having an external inquiry into Islamophobia as you promised on television.
JOHNSON: Yes, we are.
JOHNSON: We are having an inquiry into Islamophobia and all types of prejudice in the Conservative Party.
JOHNSON: Of course we will do that.
JOHNSON: We will begin by the end of this year if we are lucky enough to be returned.
JOHNSON: Let me be clear that I am proud of the record of the Conservative Party in promoting women to...
JOHNSON: Which party has produced two female Prime Ministers?
JOHNSON: Ours.
JOHNSON: We have large numbers of women in the Cabinet today, I am delighted to say, and we have a very large and growing number, we have at least 35% of our candidates at this election are female.
JOHNSON: delighted by our record.
JOHNSON: Yes, of course, there is more that we can do.
JOHNSON: But under the Conservatives, the gender pay gap has shrunk, and we are doing everything we can to help women into the workforce, not least through childcare policies, some of which I announced today.
QUESTIONER_0: Well, we have another question on your record.
QUESTIONER_0: There's a forest of hands, so I'm just going to try and get to as many as I can, but let's hear from Richard... Do you want me to take down some questions and then try and answer them?
QUESTIONER_0: Well, let's just hear a question from Richard Cocker first of all.
QUESTIONER_0: Yes.
QUESTIONER_55: Good evening, Prime Minister.
QUESTIONER_55: In 2015, the Tory Government pledged to recruit and to train an additional 5,000 GPs by 2020.
QUESTIONER_55: In 2019, there are actually fewer GPs.
QUESTIONER_55: Why on earth should I now believe yet another pledge that you will recruit an additional 6,000 GPs over the course of the next Parliament?
JOHNSON: I think, to the best of my knowledge, we have 5,000 more doctors.
JOHNSON: I appreciate it's not the same as GPs.
JOHNSON: We have 5,000 more doctors this year than last year.
JOHNSON: We are making progress.
QUESTIONER_0: But his point is, the pledges have been made before and have not been delivered.
QUESTIONER_0: So why should he believe your pledge this time?
JOHNSON: because we are, look at what we've done already with nurses, there are 17,000 more nurses now than there were in 2010.
JOHNSON: I'm afraid it's a...
JOHNSON: But what about having fewer GPs than in 2015?
JOHNSON: And yes, look, if you want my view on this, yes of course I want
JOHNSON: more GPs.
JOHNSON: And of course I want more investment in the NHS.
JOHNSON: And we're putting in now the biggest ever cash boost into the NHS under this One Nation Conservative government.
JOHNSON: And we will get more GPs, 54 million GP appointments, more GP appointments between now and 2025.
JOHNSON: We will do that because we are putting the sums, and it's not just that we're building new hospitals, we're investing in people as well.
JOHNSON: Do you want the answer?
JOHNSON: The answer is that we're upgrading 20 and as a result of the decisions that we've taken... Prime Minister, it's six.
JOHNSON: No, as a result of the decisions that we have taken, in 10 years' time, 40 new hospitals will have been built.
JOHNSON: And yes, we're starting...
QUESTIONER_0: Hang on, it is six, just so we're clear.
JOHNSON: Yes, we're starting with six, but there are 40...
QUESTIONER_0: So at the moment it is upgrading six existing hospitals?
JOHNSON: No, it is building six new ones immediately but a programme over the next ten years with seed funding already going in to build 40 new hospitals.
QUESTIONER_55: That is the plan.
QUESTIONER_55: With respect, we do need a lot of extra cash in the NHS and it is through years of underinvestment that we are in the position we are in.
QUESTIONER_55: I agree with that.
QUESTIONER_55: It is as much about the conditions as it is about the money.
QUESTIONER_55: Morale in the NHS is on its knees.
QUESTIONER_55: The workload is going through the roof.
QUESTIONER_55: We can't keep the GPs that are close to retirement from retiring because they just see this and they think, I want out.
QUESTIONER_55: When we're trying to train new GPs to come into the service, they see all of this and they think, do I want to stay in England?
QUESTIONER_55: We've invested hundreds of thousands of pounds in their training.
QUESTIONER_55: And they look and think, do I want to commit the next 40 years of my career here?
QUESTIONER_55: going to go to Australia, New Zealand, Canada, and they go there, they work 40 hours instead of 60-hour weeks, they get better pay, they don't have a political football, they don't get treated like a political football.
QUESTIONER_55: We need to look at the conditions as well as the money that has been invested.
JOHNSON: I totally agree with that and I admire massively the work that all the staff do in the NHS and I have to say I think your point is right and many doctors, many senior doctors have made the point to me particularly about their pension arrangements and we're trying to address that.
JOHNSON: We've just taken further steps to address that.
JOHNSON: this year, and I know the problem that doctors face, but we are also recruiting huge numbers.
JOHNSON: I just say sincerely to people, the only way we can do this is by having a strong economy.
JOHNSON: I am afraid to say, and that is the reality, the economy has grown every year for the last nine years, it is now 20% bigger than it was, and when Labour left office last time,
JOHNSON: as with every departing Labour government, they left an economic shambles.
JOHNSON: And if you look at what was proposed yesterday, not only is there a vast hole in the heart of it, in the sense that we don't know what their Brexit policy is, but their economic plans for this country would be utterly ruined.
JOHNSON: But people want to ask you about your plans, Mr Johnson.
JOHNSON: And it would make us...
JOHNSON: I'll tell you.
JOHNSON: No, no, wait a minute.
JOHNSON: We are going to continue to fund the NHS.
QUESTIONER_0: There's so many hands up and we've got so few minutes left, so I'm going to try and have as few hands as I can.
QUESTIONER_0: Yes, I'll do about three or four.
QUESTIONER_0: If you keep your questions brief.
QUESTIONER_0: The man with the glasses.
QUESTIONER_56: I'm a physiotherapist, and the problem is across the board in the NHS.
QUESTIONER_56: Part of the problem was getting rid of the NHS bursary, which stopped a lot of mature students coming back.
QUESTIONER_56: I wouldn't have been able to train without that bursary, and you've shut a lot of people out with that, so would you reverse that decision to help get people back in?
QUESTIONER_0: OK, let's take a couple more.
QUESTIONER_0: The woman with the glasses here.
QUESTIONER_57: I'm a junior doctor in A&E in the NHS.
QUESTIONER_57: And over the past nine years since you've been in power, I've seen that waiting lists are getting longer.
QUESTIONER_57: People are in trolleys for hours and hours in A&E.
QUESTIONER_57: And it's not just inconvenient.
QUESTIONER_57: People are dying.
QUESTIONER_57: And I think you're lying to us.
QUESTIONER_57: Every year, you promise more money for the NHS.
QUESTIONER_57: But the reality is, in the NHS, people who work there and who use it know that that money isn't getting through.
QUESTIONER_57: Why should we trust that you're going to get this $26 billion for the NHS when you've got years of cuts and people are dying?
QUESTIONER_57: One more, the man in the pink shirt.
QUESTIONER_58: A big part of the election process is all about the trust that you want us to put into you.
QUESTIONER_58: And even in this sort of campaign over the last week, we've seen Twitter handles that have been changed by the Conservatives.
QUESTIONER_58: We've seen URLs that have been bought purporting to be from Labour, I think.
QUESTIONER_58: And you're asking us to put our trust in big decisions, but yet even simple things, you can't seem to get that right.
QUESTIONER_58: So why on earth should we trust you with anything else?
JOHNSON: Well, look at what...
JOHNSON: Thank you.
JOHNSON: Let's get back to this central issue.
JOHNSON: Look at what I said I would do when I set out to be Mayor of London ten years ago.
JOHNSON: No, in fairness, Mr Johnson, that's not the question.
JOHNSON: The question is about the NHS.
JOHNSON: I'm having questions about whether I can deliver.
JOHNSON: We massively cut crime.
JOHNSON: I promised to cut crime and we did.
JOHNSON: We had a huge investment
JOHNSON: very substantially, a 50% cut in the murder rate.
JOHNSON: We massively invested in transport and cut delays on the tube by 30%.
JOHNSON: We outbuilt the Labour Party when it came to housing.
JOHNSON: I overdelivered on my promises.
JOHNSON: When you look at what I promised on the steps of Downing Street a few months ago, three or so months ago, I promised we would put 20,000 more police on the streets of our country.
JOHNSON: are coming there.
JOHNSON: I have talked to them.
JOHNSON: They are being recruited now.
JOHNSON: I said we would put the biggest ever cash boost into the NHS and it is happening.
JOHNSON: We are doing 20 hospital upgrades and 40 new hospitals.
JOHNSON: To get to all the points being raised, yes, of course,
JOHNSON: I understand that things have been tough in the NHS, and I understand the pressures that the NHS is under.
JOHNSON: But as I say, I've talked to hundreds of doctors and nurses in the last few months.
JOHNSON: I know the massive, massive demand that the NHS faces.
JOHNSON: But we can only meet that demand if we have a dynamic economy.
JOHNSON: And I'm afraid we won't get this economy really moving again
JOHNSON: We won't get the investment coming in, and you know what I'm going to say, until we get...
JOHNSON: It's true.
JOHNSON: It happens to be true.
JOHNSON: Until we get Brexit done.
JOHNSON: And at the moment, that is hanging over us.
JOHNSON: It's paralysing Parliament.
JOHNSON: And to get back to your trust point, that is, in my view, the single biggest corrosion of trust in politics.
JOHNSON: People voted three and a half years ago for their will to be respected.
JOHNSON: Every other party that you've had on tonight is basically trying to frustrate that outcome.
JOHNSON: We have a deal, and it's a good deal.
JOHNSON: It will allow us...
JOHNSON: It's a great deal.
JOHNSON: It's there.
JOHNSON: It's ready to go.
JOHNSON: It's, as I never tire of saying, oven ready.
JOHNSON: OK, we're out of time.
JOHNSON: I'm so sorry.
JOHNSON: And it will enable us to have 2020
JOHNSON: not as a year of two pointless referendums, but 2020 as a year of prosperity and growth.
JOHNSON: That's what I want to see.
QUESTIONER_0: Mr Johnson, thank you very much.
QUESTIONER_0: So, thank you very much to Boris Johnson.
QUESTIONER_0: And that concludes our evening.
QUESTIONER_0: It's been worth it, hasn't it, I think?
