QUESTIONER_0: Let us begin straight away with our first question, and it is from Sue Barclay.
QUESTIONER_1: People are dismayed by the lack of integrity and honesty in politics today.
QUESTIONER_1: After the recent allegations about political betting, how would you restore trust in politics?
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you very much, Sue, for kicking us off.
QUESTIONER_0: Now, both of your parties have faced allegations in this regard in recent days.
QUESTIONER_0: We know of five Conservatives being investigated and one Labour.
QUESTIONER_0: Rishi Sunak.
SUNAK: Well, Sue, I completely share your anger.
SUNAK: I was as frustrated as you are furious when I learnt about these allegations.
SUNAK: That's why, alongside the Gambling Commission, we initiated our own internal inquiries into what had happened and, as a result of that, have suspended two candidates.
SUNAK: And I've been crystal clear.
SUNAK: Anyone who has broken the law, broken the rules, should not only face the full consequences of the law, I will ensure that they're booted out of the Conservative Party.
QUESTIONER_0: Keir Starmer?
STARMER: Sue, thank you very much for your question, which I think is on a lot of people's minds, this question of respect and integrity in politics.
STARMER: And you have to lead from the front on issues like this.
STARMER: I think over the last 14 years, politics has become too much about self-entitlement and MPs thinking about what they can get for themselves.
STARMER: And one of the important choices, and the thing that I would like to do if I'm elected Prime Minister, is to reset politics so that politics returns to public service.
STARMER: In relation to these gambling allegations, the instinct of these people to think the first thing they should do is try to make money was the wrong instinct and we have to change that.
STARMER: But it is also a question of leadership because this isn't just, you know, what's happened this week, last week in the Gambling Commission.
STARMER: We saw Partygate earlier in this Parliament.
STARMER: The Prime Minister himself
STARMER: was convicted and fined for breaking the rules which he brought in and imposed on everybody else.
STARMER: And of course, we've seen what happened with the COVID contracts and the huge amounts of money that were made.
STARMER: This takes leadership.
STARMER: What I did when one of my team was alleged to have been involved and investigated by the Gambling Commission, they were suspended within minutes because I knew it made it really important to be swift.
STARMER: the Prime Minister delayed and delayed and delayed until eventually he was a bullied into taking action.
QUESTIONER_0: Let me get a response, let me get a response Keir Starmer to those accusations.
SUNAK: Well it was important to me that
SUNAK: given the seriousness and the sensitivity of the matters at hand, that they were dealt with properly.
SUNAK: And that's what I've done.
SUNAK: We had an independent internal inquiry into what happened, have taken action and suspended the candidates involved, and I've been crystal clear that they should face the full consequences of the law.
SUNAK: But Keir Starmer talks about leadership in politics.
SUNAK: That's what Sue's question was about.
SUNAK: It was a broad question about how to do that.
SUNAK: I also think leadership means being straight with people.
SUNAK: It means having the courage of your convictions, not changing your mind on every single position that you've taken, and being upfront about what you want to do for the country.
SUNAK: That's not what Keir Starmer is doing.
SUNAK: He's not being honest with everyone about his plans to raise their taxes.
SUNAK: I think that will erode trust in politics.
SUNAK: And that's the choice at this election.
QUESTIONER_0: Let's just stick to the heart of the question, first of all, because it was sparked by the recent allegations about political betting, and Sue asked how you would restore trust in politics.
QUESTIONER_0: So if you've acted now to withdraw support from those two Conservative candidates, what did you find in that investigation?
SUNAK: Well, Bashar, you know there's an independent investigation which is ongoing, which is why I can't say anything further about that.
SUNAK: You will understand that.
SUNAK: Yeah, but we knew about that one a while ago.
SUNAK: But when we had our internal inquiries, when we found things that were not appropriate, I took action and suspended the candidates.
SUNAK: I've been crystal clear.
SUNAK: I was furious to hear about these things.
SUNAK: That's why I've dealt with it.
SUNAK: But the choice of this election is about, as Sue said, it's about leadership, it's about integrity in politics.
SUNAK: And that's a question about doing what you say.
SUNAK: Keir Starmer's made this broader point, but the point is he's changed his mind on every major position that he's taken.
SUNAK: He doesn't have the courage of his convictions and is not being straight with everybody now about his plans if he wins power to raise people's taxes.
SUNAK: That's not going to do anything to restore trust in politics, and that's a choice for everyone at this election.
SUNAK: Continue tax cuts with the Conservatives or Keir Starmer's tax rises, which he is not being straight with everyone about.
QUESTIONER_0: Again, to return to the question, Keir Starmer, the Labour candidate from whom you've withdrawn support appears to have betted on losing his own election.
QUESTIONER_0: Do you know if any other candidate has placed similar bets in this campaign?
STARMER: Well, he was, as you say, investigated by the gambling commission because he bets on himself to lose.
STARMER: As soon as the commission said they were investigating, I suspended him.
STARMER: And I've made very clear to my candidates that I expect high standards in politics.
STARMER: I said last week
STARMER: that the Prime Minister should have taken decisive action.
STARMER: And I said last week, should one of my candidates be investigated by the Commission, then they would be suspended and their feet wouldn't leave the floor.
STARMER: And that's what I did.
STARMER: And so my candidates know I expect the highest standards.
STARMER: and that I'll take decisive action if they fall below those standards.
STARMER: But do you know that...
STARMER: I am... Back to Sue's point.
STARMER: Do you know...
STARMER: I'm absolutely determined... OK. ..to return politics to public service.
STARMER: Do you know that none of your other candidates have placed similar bets?
STARMER: That integrity in public service is so important for our country.
QUESTIONER_0: Do you know that none of your other candidates have placed similar bets?
STARMER: Well, I've made clear to my candidates what the standards are, and they've seen by my actions what the consequences are if they fall short of those standards.
STARMER: But the Prime Minister hides behind a process.
STARMER: He could have taken decisive action last week, even the week before.
STARMER: But he eventually got round to it when he was bullied by other people into doing it.
STARMER: That's not leadership.
STARMER: And he talks about integrity.
STARMER: I'm sorry, when you get convicted for breaking the COVID rules, which you imposed on the rest of the country, you really shouldn't be talking about integrity.
STARMER: and politics.
SUNAK: Well, leadership means being straight with people about what you plan to do.
SUNAK: I've set out my plans clearly, and I appreciate, actually, that not everyone's going to agree with me on everything, but at least you know where I stand.
SUNAK: Now, Keir Starmer is not being straight with you about his plans to raise your taxes.
SUNAK: I don't think that's leadership.
SUNAK: I don't think that people should surrender their family finances to the Labour Party, and that's the choice for people at this election.
STARMER: Well, let me just address that, if I may, because we have set out in our manifesto all of our plans.
STARMER: They're fully funded, they're fully costed and we've set out that we will not be increasing income tax, national insurance or VAT.
STARMER: What the Prime Minister is doing, he's got a manifesto that's got promises to you and everybody watching which are unfunded because his Chancellor has said that the money he's relying on has already been spent.
STARMER: Now, that is the mistake that Liz Truss made.
STARMER: That's what cost so many people so much across this country, and now we've got to repeat unfunded commitments, lots of promises, promises, promises, promises, but where's the money coming from?
STARMER: The Chancellor himself has said the money was spent last year, it isn't available.
STARMER: That's a... And if there's five more years of this... OK.
STARMER: We're going to have the same as we've got now, a cost of living crisis bearing down on people across this country, really struggling because the economy is broken.
STARMER: And this is the chance at this election to turn the page and start to rebuild our country with a stable economy.
SUNAK: OK. Misha, just to build on it, what the Chancellor did this morning was ask his opposite number, Keir Starmer's shadow Chancellor, to rule out raising all your taxes beyond what they've already announced in the first budget.
SUNAK: and the Shadow Chancellor wasn't able to do that today.
SUNAK: That's what the Chancellor did today, but you don't have to listen to me.
SUNAK: Just go online, go to the Telegraph website, because we've just found a recording that they have put out there from the Deputy Chancellor from the Labour Party admitting that their plans will cost hundreds of billions of pounds.
QUESTIONER_0: I'm just going to explain something to anyone who hasn't seen this today.
SUNAK: That is going to cost all of you thousands of pounds of tax rises.
SUNAK: That's why I say Keir Starmer and the Labour Party are not being straight with you.
SUNAK: So do not surrender to their tax rises.
QUESTIONER_0: Let me just explain.
QUESTIONER_0: This is a reference to Darren Jones, the Shadow Chief Secretary to the Treasury, one of your senior Treasury team, who in a recording given to the Daily Telegraph has said decarbonising the British economy will cost hundreds of billions of pounds.
STARMER: We've set out in our manifesto what we want to do to go to renewable energy, and we've set out how much that will cost, exactly how much is going to be put in, and we've got a column saying how that's going to be funded.
STARMER: Yes, it is absolutely right that we want to get in investors to come alongside that government money, and we've been talking, you won't be surprised to learn this, to global investors for the best part of two years.
STARMER: to say that if we put down this money set out in our manifesto, will you come alongside it and put down many more billions of pounds so that in partnership with the government we can make the change that we need?
STARMER: Hang on, hang on.
STARMER: Let me just finish this.
STARMER: I'm sure we're going to come back to the same thing later on.
STARMER: This is your own shadow Chancellor.
STARMER: If you don't mind, I'm going to get to the next question.
STARMER: Just be straight with the people.
STARMER: How many hundreds is it?
QUESTIONER_2: Is it 200?
STARMER: Is it 300?
STARMER: Is it 400?
STARMER: I think the Prime Minister must have put a bet on how many times
STARMER: going to interrupt me.
QUESTIONER_0: I do want to turn to the next question because lots of people are waiting and they've got important questions that they would like answers to.
QUESTIONER_0: If you can hear any noises off, ladies and gentlemen or anyone at home, there is a protest taking place outside which is also an aspect of our democracy and people exercising their freedom of speech.
QUESTIONER_0: Our next question here comes from Mary Armstrong.
QUESTIONER_3: Evening.
QUESTIONER_3: I've worked two jobs since I was 18, and I'm now 60.
QUESTIONER_3: And I think too many people don't understand how important and better it is for you to be working hard.
QUESTIONER_3: I also think too many people are on out-of-work benefits.
QUESTIONER_3: My question is, what are you going to do to help more people to come off benefits and back into work?
QUESTIONER_0: Mary, thank you very much for that.
QUESTIONER_0: Keir Starmer, what are you going to do to get more people off work, off benefits and into work?
STARMER: Yeah, can I first agree with you that work is, of course, about pay and being able to pay your own way and, you know, support your family.
STARMER: But it is also about dignity and respect.
STARMER: And my dad worked in a factory all his life.
STARMER: He was a toolmaker.
STARMER: And having a secure job for him was really important to his respect and integrity.
STARMER: In relation to those that are out of work, my rule is this.
STARMER: If you can work, you should work.
STARMER: And we've got a plan to get people into work, working with businesses to support people in.
STARMER: I think we need to change the job centre.
STARMER: and the career service, because at the moment, when I ask businesses, if you have a vacancy, are you going to the job centre to get that vacancy filled?
STARMER: They say they're not, so we need to do that.
STARMER: The other thing, Mary, that we absolutely need to do is to get the waiting lists down in the NHS, because very many people aren't able to work or to work in the way they want.
STARMER: because they're waiting for an operation because of the catastrophic level of waiting lists under this government.
QUESTIONER_0: So let's hear your first response, Rishi Sunak, to Mary's question.
QUESTIONER_0: What are you going to do to get people off benefits?
SUNAK: Mary, there's a clear choice for you and everyone who believes, like you do, the situation isn't right.
SUNAK: Because if you want lower taxes and lower welfare, that's what I'll deliver.
SUNAK: If you want higher taxes and higher welfare, that's what Keir Starmer will do.
SUNAK: So I strongly agree that people are better off in work.
SUNAK: It's not just for the financial security it brings you, it's about the purpose, the dignity that it brings to people which you alluded to and I strongly agree with.
SUNAK: The number of people currently out of work on ill health and disability benefits is too high.
SUNAK: It's gone up by 800,000 since the pandemic, it's gone up by 60% the bill.
SUNAK: in the last few years.
SUNAK: We've got to do something about that.
SUNAK: I made a speech about this a few months ago.
SUNAK: I set out a comprehensive plan to reform the welfare system, to tighten it up so that those who can work do work.
SUNAK: We're stricter about those eligibility criteria.
SUNAK: That's fair for all of you who are working hard paying your taxes.
SUNAK: It's better for those people and that's what I'll do.
SUNAK: But when I announced that,
SUNAK: And just again recently, Keir Starmer and the Labour Party opposed every single thing that I set out to deliver what you want.
SUNAK: Every single thing.
SUNAK: They do not think that you can save a single penny in the growing welfare bill.
SUNAK: That's what their numbers show, and that's what they've said.
SUNAK: So the choice for you is clear.
SUNAK: If you want lower welfare and lower taxes, I will deliver that for you.
SUNAK: Higher taxes and higher welfare is what you will get with Keir Starmer.
QUESTIONER_0: We actually have a related question.
QUESTIONER_0: So I'm going to bring in Beverley McKenzie now.
QUESTIONER_4: I've worked all my life, but had to stop due to illness.
QUESTIONER_4: Disabled people like me get hit in the worst way when we want to get back to work and help, but often we can't.
QUESTIONER_4: How will candidates ensure we're not punished by benefit sanctions?
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you very much.
QUESTIONER_0: Rishi Sunak, so you've said you'd tighten the system, you'd be stricter.
QUESTIONER_0: What does that mean for people like Beverly?
SUNAK: Yes, sorry, what was it?
SUNAK: I couldn't quite hear.
SUNAK: Is it Beverly?
SUNAK: Beverly.
SUNAK: Beverly, I actually believe in a compassionate welfare system that supports everyone who genuinely needs it.
SUNAK: And you saw me do that during COVID, making sure that we've got support to the most vulnerable.
SUNAK: That will always happen under a Conservative government, always happened under me.
SUNAK: But what we won't do,
SUNAK: is have a system where people are not supported into work if they can work.
SUNAK: So what we're going to do is make sure that we reform the fit note, sick note process, which isn't working.
SUNAK: It's signing far too many people off as not fit for work.
SUNAK: We're going to look at, when you asked about benefits and sanctions, we're going to provide active support for people into work.
SUNAK: But I also think that if people have been offered jobs that they can do,
SUNAK: and that they don't take them, then that's not okay.
SUNAK: So after 12 months, what I've said is, we will do something about that.
SUNAK: If your job coach says to you, look, there's work that you can do, that everyone agrees you can do, there's a job for you, that you're fit enough and well enough to do, and you refuse to take it, I don't think that's fair on everyone else after 12 months of support, so we will tighten that up.
SUNAK: I think that's fair for everybody, because fundamentally, I think that those people who can work, should work, that's, I think,
SUNAK: fundamental tenet of fairness in our system, which most people would agree with.
SUNAK: That's why I think we can save money in the welfare bill, because it's forecast to grow at an extraordinary rate over the next few years.
QUESTIONER_0: And I want to use that money to support people and to cut your taxes.
QUESTIONER_0: What is wrong, if you believe it is wrong, what Rishi Sunak is saying, that if someone is offered a job and they can do that job, and they turn it down, that's wrong?
STARMER: No, there's nothing wrong with that, and I just want to address Beverly's point.
STARMER: Hang on, you opposed it when I announced it.
STARMER: You literally opposed it.
STARMER: If you listen to people in the audience across the country more often, you might not be quite so out of touch.
STARMER: Beverly.
STARMER: Beverly, can I just address the point you make, because it's a really important point, which is very many people with illness or disability do want to get back into work for the very reason that was alluded to before, the respect for dignity and, you know, the support that it gives them.
STARMER: But it's difficult to do so because they're worried about whether they can do it and whether, you know, they'll last a period of months.
STARMER: So what a number of firms are doing, businesses, and I've been to see this myself and I support this,
STARMER: is having a supported scheme where people can be supported back into work for a number of months to make sure they can make that transition and get back into work.
STARMER: I think that's a really good scheme.
STARMER: That's what we would put into place.
STARMER: But I do have to address this question.
STARMER: The Prime Minister keeps saying he's going to cut taxes.
STARMER: He has raised tax 26 times.
STARMER: Nobody's raised more tax than this Prime Minister.
STARMER: This is not a question about tax.
QUESTIONER_0: This is a question about getting people back to work.
QUESTIONER_0: So the numbers have risen considerably since the Covid pandemic.
QUESTIONER_0: The numbers of people economically inactive due to long-term sickness has risen to 2.8 million.
QUESTIONER_0: So how would you, you are seeking power, what would you get those numbers down to through the approach you are talking about?
STARMER: We want to get the numbers right down.
STARMER: To what?
STARMER: With a plan to get people back into work.
STARMER: partly that's supported, partly it's the changes we want to make to the job centres to make sure that where businesses and public services, the NHS doesn't go to the job centre when it's got vacancies, they should do so we want to merge those two services but the other thing if we're going to get people back into work is we have to tackle these terrible waiting lists because nearly 8 million people are on the waiting list and so it's not their fault
STARMER: that they can't get back into work.
STARMER: It's the fault of the government that's put us in this terrible position.
STARMER: We have to address these bases.
SUNAK: Fundamentally, there's a very clear choice and a very clear dividing line.
SUNAK: I think you've got to change the eligibility criteria in the welfare system.
SUNAK: You've got to make it clear that people who can work should work.
SUNAK: That means looking at all the gateways we have and actually being more rigorous about asking people to provide medical information when they're making these claims, reforming the sick note process, being stricter about saying to people who don't accept a job after 12 months that that's not OK. Those are all the practical things that I've set out.
SUNAK: I think that's fair.
SUNAK: Now, Keir Starmer can stand here tonight and say what he wants.
SUNAK: When I made that speech, and you can all go and read it and see what they said, they opposed every single measure.
SUNAK: Just two weeks ago, they were asked about it.
SUNAK: They said, we oppose all those measures.
SUNAK: So it's one thing to stand here and say all these things.
SUNAK: You should at least be upfront with people.
SUNAK: You don't think my approach is the right one.
SUNAK: You are going to have higher welfare under you, and that's why you can't deliver tax cuts the way that I can.
SUNAK: And people should not surrender to this.
QUESTIONER_5: Will the welfare bill be higher?
STARMER: They have been in power for 14 years.
STARMER: Why has he only just thought of this with a week to go before the general election?
STARMER: Honestly, if there is that much wrong with the system, who is the guy in charge of the system over the last 14 years?
STARMER: Why is it so bad?
SUNAK: You want to be in charge but you have nothing to say to people about what you would do about it.
SUNAK: This election is about the future.
QUESTIONER_0: Will the welfare bill be higher under you, Keir Starmer?
STARMER: No, it needs to come down.
STARMER: It needs to come down by getting people back into work with a clear plan, and it needs to come down...
STARMER: we're tackling the waiting lists so that more people can get back into work, which is why one of the first things that we will do if we're elected in to serve our country, serve being the word I choose, is to put in place 40,000 extra appointments, NHS appointments, each and every week, that's two million a year, to drive down those waiting lists, to give people the comfort and operations that they need, and to allow them to get back into the economy so that we can
STARMER: grow the economy, which is the thing that's been missing so desperately over the last 14 years.
SUNAK: What Keir Starmer is not telling you is actually most of the people who we're talking about, who Sue asked about originally, aren't on an NHS waiting list.
SUNAK: So talking about that isn't an answer to this problem.
SUNAK: Nearly 8 million.
SUNAK: The answer to this problem is actually being stricter about the eligibility criteria, making sure that everyone who can work does work, because that's fair to everyone like Sue who is working very hard and putting in, that's what I will do.
SUNAK: I promise you I will deliver on it.
SUNAK: We will.
SUNAK: cut the welfare bill, the growth in the welfare bill.
SUNAK: It is unsustainable.
SUNAK: We spend too much on it.
SUNAK: I set out a plan to do so.
SUNAK: Labour oppose all of it.
SUNAK: So the choice for you is simple.
SUNAK: If you want higher taxes and higher welfare, that's what Keir Starmer will do.
SUNAK: If you want lower taxes and lower welfare, that's what I will do.
SUNAK: Do not surrender our welfare system to the Labour Party and Keir Starmer.
QUESTIONER_0: I'm going to turn to our next question on that note.
QUESTIONER_0: And this one comes from Steve Curtis.
QUESTIONER_6: Good evening, all.
QUESTIONER_6: We're an island.
QUESTIONER_6: Why can't we easily close our borders?
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you, Steve, for that question.
QUESTIONER_0: Keir Starmer.
STARMER: Steve, the biggest threat to our borders at the moment is the very many people arriving by small boat over the Channel.
STARMER: And there are record numbers.
STARMER: Since Rishi Sunak became Prime Minister, 50,000 people have come across by small boat.
STARMER: and the government has effectively lost control of our borders.
STARMER: And that means it's not just a border security issue, it's actually a national security issue, because the government's lost control of who's coming and what their background is.
STARMER: Now, I think that nobody but nobody should be making that journey across the Channel.
STARMER: And we have to smash the gangs that are running this vile trade.
STARMER: There are gangs that are making a fortune putting people into boats across the Channel, an absolute fortune.
STARMER: and I think they can be taken down.
STARMER: And Steve, before I was a politician, I was the chief prosecutor for England and Wales, so I ran all criminal prosecutions in England and Wales, in all of our criminal courts, and we had to deal with terrorist plots and other plots, drug plots,
STARMER: and gun plots, which were across various other countries.
STARMER: We grouped together with police and law enforcement across Europe, and we took down those terrorist gangs.
STARMER: I've seen it done.
STARMER: I've been part of the operations to do it.
STARMER: I do not accept, I will never accept, that the only gangs that apparently can't be taken down are the gangs that are putting vulnerable people in boats to go across the Channel.
QUESTIONER_0: Let's turn to Rishi Sunak, because we haven't heard from him yet on Steve's question, which was, we're an island, why can't we easily close our borders?
SUNAK: Steve, you're right to highlight the issue.
SUNAK: It's completely unfair what's happening.
SUNAK: When people come here illegally, jump the queue, it not only puts pressure on public services and not only threatens our security, it's an affront to that sense of fairness, which is fundamental to our national character.
SUNAK: And that's why I've made it a priority to stop the boats.
SUNAK: We have made progress.
SUNAK: The numbers have come down over the past 12 months compared to the 12 months before.
SUNAK: But, in order to fully solve this problem, you need a deterrent.
SUNAK: We need to make it crystal clear to people that if they come to our country illegally, they won't be able to stay.
SUNAK: And that's why, if I'm your Prime Minister on July 5th, the flights will go to Rwanda, we will build that deterrent that multiple other European countries now agree is the right way to deal with this problem, and that's how we solve this problem.
SUNAK: If Keir Starmer is your Prime Minister, all those illegal migrants will be out on our streets.
SUNAK: And that is the choice for you.
SUNAK: Do not surrender our borders to the Labour Party.
QUESTIONER_0: On the numbers, Keir Starmer, just one moment.
QUESTIONER_0: I want to clarify something.
QUESTIONER_0: Small boat arrivals did come down last year, but arrivals so far this year are at a record high.
QUESTIONER_0: It's more than 13,000 people.
QUESTIONER_0: Have you lost control, as Keir Starmer has said?
QUESTIONER_0: No.
SUNAK: The numbers have come down over the past month, as you acknowledge.
SUNAK: But the way to solve this problem is to have a deterrent.
SUNAK: And look, I'll tell you this.
SUNAK: The Rwanda plan is a deterrent.
SUNAK: You just have to listen to what the illegal migrants themselves are saying.
SUNAK: One of them just said, most of us are still in France due to the fear we have about Rwanda.
SUNAK: Another one said, I won't cross the channel until the Rwanda plan is destroyed.
SUNAK: If Labour win, the people smugglers are going to need a bigger boat.
SUNAK: Don't surrender our borders to the Labour Party.
STARMER: You would scrap the Rwanda plan.
STARMER: Record numbers have come under this Prime Minister's watch.
STARMER: Record numbers coming across the channel.
STARMER: And he says it's a deterrent.
STARMER: There are a few hundred that would go on a flight to Rwanda, a huge expense to the taxpayer.
STARMER: There are tens of thousands, 50,000 people have come since Rishi Sunak has been Prime Minister.
STARMER: 50,000 across the channel.
STARMER: A few hundred going every year means there's a 99% chance you're not going to Rwanda.
STARMER: Now, I've worked with criminal gangs, Rishi Sunak.
STARMER: I know that they are telling the people they're exploiting, there's a 99% chance of not going to Rwanda.
STARMER: That is not a disincentive.
STARMER: That is not a deterrent, and it's not working.
STARMER: If it were working, why are record numbers still coming under your watch, Prime Minister?
STARMER: How on earth can you say it's working?
STARMER: You put the scheme in place, the flights could go off.
STARMER: I noticed you called the election, by the way, before any flights could actually get off, and it could be tested in interesting timing.
SUNAK: But if this was such a deterrent, why is it obviously, obviously not working?
SUNAK: You spend all this time, when I first got this job, saying, call an election, call an election.
SUNAK: And then when we call an election, you spend all your time saying, why did you call an election?
SUNAK: I'm just curious.
SUNAK: This is about the future.
SUNAK: I can tell everyone what I'm going to do with illegal migrants who come to our country.
SUNAK: They will be on planes, be sent away, because they shouldn't be here.
SUNAK: What will you do with the illegal migrants that arrive to the UK?
SUNAK: What will you do with them?
SUNAK: You've had three weeks to think of an answer.
SUNAK: What is it?
STARMER: We've got tens of thousands of people here who've come unlawfully.
STARMER: The Prime Minister says he'll send them all to Rwanda.
STARMER: The Rwanda scheme takes a few hundred.
STARMER: It would take literally 300 years to get all the people here unlawfully to Rwanda.
STARMER: So they're going to stay here.
QUESTIONER_0: If elected, what would you do?
STARMER: At the moment, they're not being processed.
STARMER: So they're sitting in hotels, which you are all paying for.
STARMER: They're not processed.
STARMER: And as a result of not being processed, that means not a single one, even those that shouldn't be here, could be returned anywhere.
STARMER: So once they've got here under the Prime Minister's scheme, they're here for life.
STARMER: That's an absurd situation to have got into.
STARMER: So yes, we do need to process the claims.
STARMER: But what will you do with them?
STARMER: We've got to process the claims.
STARMER: You're sitting there with tens of thousands of people.
STARMER: But what?
STARMER: Just let me finish.
SUNAK: When illegal migrants come to our country, what will you do with them?
SUNAK: It's a very simple question.
SUNAK: I can tell people what I will do with them.
SUNAK: I will put them on planes to Rwanda because they shouldn't be able to stay.
QUESTIONER_5: How long?
SUNAK: 300 years?
SUNAK: What will you do with illegal migrants who come from our country?
SUNAK: What will you do with them?
SUNAK: It's a simple question.
SUNAK: His plan is to take... What will you do with them?
SUNAK: They need to be processed at the moment.
STARMER: Processed?
STARMER: They're not...
STARMER: These claims are not being processed.
QUESTIONER_0: Which, to be clear, will mean most of them will be given asylum.
STARMER: They will get the right to remain in this country.
STARMER: At the moment, 100% of them
STARMER: are effectively being granted asylum in this country because they can't go anywhere.
STARMER: They can't go anywhere.
STARMER: The Prime Minister knows this.
STARMER: And if he thinks I'm wrong, he should say so.
STARMER: Because they're not being processed, they cannot be returned to where they came from.
STARMER: Can they, Prime Minister?
STARMER: If he wants to correct that, now's his chance to do it.
STARMER: They cannot be returned.
SUNAK: I'm very clear about where we'll send them.
SUNAK: Well, do you know where these people come from?
SUNAK: No, he's not answering the question.
SUNAK: Do you know where they come from?
SUNAK: Iran?
SUNAK: Syria, Afghanistan.
SUNAK: So when Keir Starmer says he's going to return people, is he going to sit down?
SUNAK: Are you going to sit down with the Iranian ayatollahs?
SUNAK: Are you going to try and do a deal with the Taliban?
SUNAK: It's completely nonsensical what you are saying, right?
SUNAK: You are taking people for fools, right?
SUNAK: I think that these people should not stay in our country.
SUNAK: They will be on planes to Rwanda.
SUNAK: That's what I will do with them.
SUNAK: You still can't answer the question.
QUESTIONER_1: What will you do with them?
SUNAK: All illegal migrants who arrive will be processed and put on planes to Rwanda.
SUNAK: That is the choice for you.
SUNAK: If you think illegal migrants should not be in our country, they should be sent somewhere else to build the deterrent.
SUNAK: I will deliver for that for you.
SUNAK: Do not surrender our borders to Keir Starmer and the Labour Party.
SUNAK: This situation will just get worse.
SUNAK: We will become the soft touch of Europe.
SUNAK: And as I said the other night, they are queuing up in Calais waiting for a Keir Starmer to be in charge.
QUESTIONER_0: So you will send tens of thousands of people who are here and out of the asylum system at the moment.
QUESTIONER_0: You are promising to send them all to Rwanda.
SUNAK: We will have a number of flights from July through to build this deterrent.
SUNAK: That's what I've always said.
SUNAK: The principle here is I don't think people who come here should be able to stay.
SUNAK: OK, you talk about this as if you care about the issue, but this is...
SUNAK: When you ran for the Labour leadership, which wasn't very long ago, you promised to protect free movement, you said you would close, you promised to close detention centres for illegal migrants, and you boasted in that letter of getting illegal migrants more welfare.
SUNAK: Like, that's what you actually believe, and that's why you can't trust him on this issue.
SUNAK: So I say it again, do not surrender our borders to the Labour Party.
STARMER: I'm very clear that what we need to do here, we need to get our security, our borders back.
STARMER: They've lost control.
STARMER: 50,000 people have come.
STARMER: We've got to smash the gangs that are doing this in the first place.
STARMER: Smash the gangs.
SUNAK: You know what?
SUNAK: I really want to address this, Michelle.
SUNAK: We passed a law in Parliament.
SUNAK: People have to bear in mind, right?
SUNAK: You're right.
SUNAK: We do have to smash the gangs.
SUNAK: What does that mean?
SUNAK: We passed a law in Parliament.
SUNAK: We passed new laws so that our law enforcement agencies could use them.
SUNAK: You know what?
SUNAK: They've arrested 1,000 criminals and people smugglers.
SUNAK: They've sentenced them to hundreds of years, exactly as you would expect us to do.
SUNAK: That's what we did.
SUNAK: Do you know what?
SUNAK: The Labour Party voted against that law.
SUNAK: So when you stand there and say, smash the gangs, like on every other issue, you say one thing, you do another, you just don't know which Keir Starmer you're going to get.
STARMER: I've done this.
STARMER: You can't trust him on this issue.
STARMER: Do not surrender our borders to him.
STARMER: This is the difference between me and the Prime Minister.
STARMER: Before I did this job, I was running the Crown Prosecution Service.
STARMER: I was the Director of Public Prosecution.
STARMER: And it was my responsibility to take down criminal gangs on behalf of everybody in this room, everybody watching to protect the country.
STARMER: So I know that this can be done.
STARMER: You share the data, the analysis, the intelligence.
STARMER: You have to have a strategy to arrest everybody at exactly the same time.
STARMER: You need to know what evidence is going to be used in which court, where, and which country is going to have a lead on the prosecution.
STARMER: We did it to take down really dangerous terrorist gangs.
STARMER: There was one terrorist gang that involved bringing down nine planes in the Atlantic at the same time with bombs.
STARMER: That was one of the cases that I had to deal with as a prosecution.
STARMER: That's a very different kind of threat, isn't it?
STARMER: No, no, no, but these were very sophisticated terrorist gangs.
STARMER: I do not accept that this can't be done.
STARMER: for the gangs that are running this wild trade.
SUNAK: Right now, there are criminals and people smugglers that are spending hundreds of years in our jails because of the laws that the Conservatives passed.
SUNAK: When it came to it, the Labour Party opposed those laws.
SUNAK: They voted against it.
SUNAK: So when he's standing here before you tonight saying, yes, he cares about this, he's going to do about this, just look at his record.
SUNAK: This is someone who defended free movement.
SUNAK: He campaigned against the deportation of foreign criminals.
SUNAK: He can't be trusted on this issue.
SUNAK: Do not surrender our borders to him.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you both for your responses, and I'm going to turn now to our next question, which comes from Mohammad Mubarak Sheikh.
QUESTIONER_7: Hi.
QUESTIONER_7: You have both made lots of promises, but you haven't set out a clear plan to pay for those promises.
QUESTIONER_7: Where is the money going to come from?
QUESTIONER_0: You've both made lots of promises.
QUESTIONER_0: You haven't set out a clear plan to pay for those promises.
QUESTIONER_0: Where is the money going to come from, Rishi Sunak?
SUNAK: Well, actually, we talked about it, Mohamed, in Sue's question.
SUNAK: I think it's right that we make savings from the welfare bill, because it's forecast to grow at an unsustainable rate.
SUNAK: I don't think that's right.
SUNAK: I don't think that's fair.
SUNAK: Set out a comprehensive plan.
SUNAK: You can go and have a look at it online.
SUNAK: And those savings we will use to cut your taxes.
SUNAK: And what I want to do is cut taxes for people at every stage of their life.
SUNAK: So for everyone in work, we're going to continue cutting national insurance, 900 pounds this year.
SUNAK: For pensioners, we have the Triple Lock Plus.
SUNAK: We will raise the allowance delivering a tax cut for pensioners, making sure that the state pension is never subject to income tax.
SUNAK: If you're a young couple wanting to buy your first home, we're effectively going to abolish stamp duty.
SUNAK: If you have children, you're a family, we're going to expand the generosity of child benefit.
SUNAK: These are the tax cuts that I want to deliver, and if you're a small business owner, an entrepreneur, we're going to abolish National Insurance for the self-employed.
SUNAK: So those are the tax cuts, that's how we're going to pay for it, and that's the choice for you at this election.
SUNAK: You can have tax cuts with the Conservatives, or you can have thousands of pounds of tax rises under the Labour Party, because he's simply not being straight with you about what is coming.
SUNAK: Mark my words, your taxes are going up if he is in charge.
STARMER: false but Mohammed I'll answer your question everything in our manifesto has so we've set out all of our plans it's a manifesto for growing our economy for creating wealth to make sure our country is better off and everybody within the country is better off it's got clear columns setting out how much each of our plans is going to cost
STARMER: and then a column saying where that money is going to come from so that everything is fully costed and fully funded.
STARMER: We've got very strong fiscal rules because we want economic stability, which is what we've been missing in recent years.
STARMER: And the reason for that, Mohamed, because this is really, really important, is that we know what happens if unfunded tax cuts are made because Liz Truss tried that experiment on the country.
STARMER: And we're all paying the price for that.
STARMER: And when she was elected as leader of the Conservative Party, Rishi Sunak said we should unite behind her.
STARMER: I don't think we should unite behind her.
STARMER: I think we should learn the lessons, which is why I'm not prepared to allow an incoming Labour government ever, ever
STARMER: to inflict that kind of damage on people across the country, because people are still paying the price.
STARMER: Many people on a mortgage now, who've come off a fixed-rate mortgage, are now paying hundreds of pounds more because of the damage done to the economy.
STARMER: But Rishi Sunak hasn't learnt the lesson, because his manifesto has got commitments in there that are unfunded, because his Chancellor has said that the money he says he's going to use has already been spent.
STARMER: And everybody knows you can't spend the same money twice.
STARMER: So you're going to go round.
STARMER: If we have five more years of this, we're going to go round and round in circles.
STARMER: We're going to end up exactly where we are.
QUESTIONER_0: Just before you respond, because each of you had a say on that, just before you respond, I'm going to make clear that Mohammed's not alone in thinking that neither of you have set out a clear plan to pay for your promises.
QUESTIONER_0: The IFS think tank said this week that you are both, both your parties are ignoring raw facts.
QUESTIONER_0: and that huge decisions need to be made, which, in all likelihood, will mean either higher taxes or worse public services.
SUNAK: Well, actually, the IFS also said that it's right to identify welfare as a challenge that needs to be addressed, and the IFS also acknowledged that when the Conservatives previously set out savings that they would get from the welfare bill, the IFS didn't think it would happen, and, in fact, they were delivered, and I'm sure BBC Verify will put that quote on their website.
SUNAK: But, look, two years ago, I warned repeatedly
SUNAK: about what Liz Truss's economic policies would do to our country, even if it wasn't what people wanted to hear at the time.
SUNAK: I was right then.
QUESTIONER_5: And that's why you can trust me now.
SUNAK: That's why you can trust me now when I say that the Labour Party's policies will mean all your taxes are going to go up by thousands of pounds.
SUNAK: It is in their DNA.
SUNAK: Mark my words, your pension, your council tax, your home, your car, you name it, they will tax it, which is why he
SUNAK: cannot rule out raising your taxes.
SUNAK: He's been asked multiple times, will he change the council tax bans?
SUNAK: He won't rule it out.
SUNAK: I'll ask him again, but I'm going to tell you, do not surrender your family finances to Labour's tax rises.
STARMER: Let me address this directly, because the Prime Minister said he warned the country about Liz Truss and the damage that she was going to do to our economy.
STARMER: And then in the next breath, he said, we must unite behind her and support her.
STARMER: Why on earth would you unite behind someone that you say was going to do that damage?
QUESTIONER_0: Hang on, you know what it's like to fall in behind a leader of your party.
STARMER: But he's repeating the problem.
STARMER: He's repeating the problem.
STARMER: Who said unite behind her?
STARMER: She's one of his candidates.
STARMER: And his election pitch to you seems to be, my predecessor, a Tory Prime Minister, broke the country, did huge economic damage.
STARMER: Please vote Tory.
STARMER: Now, you're going to have to decide whether that's persuasive.
STARMER: He's now openly admitting the damage that the Tories have done to the economy and saying, please vote for him.
STARMER: That's the last thing we need in this country after the damage that's been done.
STARMER: My pitch is straightforward.
SUNAK: When it comes to the economy, I was right then.
SUNAK: And since I've been your Prime Minister, inflation is back to normal, the economy is growing faster than our competitors, wages are rising, energy bills are falling, we've started cutting your taxes and I will keep cutting your taxes.
SUNAK: That is my pitch to you, that's a choice at this election, their taxes that he wants to put up on you are coming.
SUNAK: He won't rule out revaluing your council tax bands, every pensioner
SUNAK: that is watching should realise that under a future Labour government, for the first time in our country's history, the state pension will be subject to a retirement tax under Labour.
SUNAK: That's what their plans are.
SUNAK: Those are the numbers, black and white.
SUNAK: We're not going to do that.
SUNAK: We're going to have the triple lock plus.
SUNAK: But for the millions of pensioners that are watching, be very worried, because you're going to face a retirement tax under the Labour Party.
STARMER: Don't insult people by putting out falsehoods.
QUESTIONER_0: Just don't insult people by putting out falsehoods.
QUESTIONER_0: You mentioned the IFS.
QUESTIONER_0: Which ones are false?
STARMER: He keeps saying we're going to raise taxes.
SUNAK: Can you confirm...
SUNAK: He obviously has put a bet on interrupting me, hasn't he?
SUNAK: ..will the state pension be subject to income tax under a future Labour government?
SUNAK: The only way for it not is for you to match our triple lot plus.
SUNAK: So maybe you can change policy here tonight.
SUNAK: Will you match our triple lot plus and ensure that state pension is never subject to income tax?
STARMER: Yes or no?
STARMER: The position on the state pension that we've set out is exactly...
STARMER: It's a yes or no?
QUESTIONER_0: Hang on, we need to hear this response.
STARMER: I think you should show some respect to the audience who want to know what I've got to say about this without constantly being interrupted.
STARMER: It really isn't the way to do the debate.
QUESTIONER_0: What's the answer to the question about whether you'll match what they're going to do on pensions?
STARMER: On this question, the position on pensioners and tax or pensions on tax that we've set out is exactly the same.
STARMER: It is the position of the government at their last budget.
STARMER: It is their position.
STARMER: The Prime Minister now says, oh, I'm going to change that.
STARMER: I'm going to change all that.
STARMER: When asked where the money is coming from, his Chancellor says the money that's being spent, it isn't there.
STARMER: That is making the same mistake again.
STARMER: Can I just address the IFS point, though, because I think that is really important.
STARMER: Everybody heard that.
SUNAK: If you're a pensioner, you should know there is a retirement tax coming for you, capital R, capital T, if he is your Prime Minister.
SUNAK: For the first time in our country's history, pensioners are going to be paying tax because he won't match our triple lock plus.
SUNAK: If I'm your Prime Minister, that won't happen.
SUNAK: And that's what I'll deliver for you.
SUNAK: As I say it again, do not surrender your finances to their tax rises.
QUESTIONER_0: I think you've got a very brief response.
QUESTIONER_0: Then I want to go to the next question.
STARMER: Well, pensioners are not going to be better off with a Prime Minister who's making promises that he can't keep because they're not funded.
STARMER: That's exactly what Liz Truss got wrong.
STARMER: There's one thing that we cannot repeat at this election.
STARMER: Please do not go back to Liz Truss mark two with this Prime Minister because the same damage will follow.
STARMER: It is funded.
STARMER: It is funded.
QUESTIONER_2: We're going to end this particular topic here.
SUNAK: The reason you can't fund it is because you think that you can't fund it.
SUNAK: Thank you, Singapore.
QUESTIONER_2: We've still got lots of topics to get through.
QUESTIONER_2: So I'm going to turn to the next question.
QUESTIONER_2: That's why you can't fund it.
QUESTIONER_0: That's why I can.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you.
QUESTIONER_0: This next question is from Karen Duran.
QUESTIONER_8: Good evening.
QUESTIONER_8: I'm a children's nurse at a local hospital.
QUESTIONER_8: I see families affected by libraries and children's centres closing.
QUESTIONER_8: How will you help councils after Nottingham City Council has effectively gone bankrupt?
QUESTIONER_8: Thank you, Karen.
QUESTIONER_0: And the council here has been run by Labour since 1991.
QUESTIONER_0: Keir Starmer.
STARMER: Yes, and I'm very concerned about the situation because I think anybody looking at a council which has run out of money is concerned about the basic services, whether it's libraries or other support that councils have to put in place.
STARMER: And this is a position for councils of all political stripes.
STARMER: There are Conservative-run councils that have struggled for money and gone bankrupt as well because of the lack of adequate and proper structured funding from the government.
STARMER: You asked what we would do about it, and I think it is important for us to set out what we would do if we came into office.
STARMER: We would change the way the payments are made to councils.
STARMER: At the moment, council leaders are saying they're made on a yearly basis, so we can't make the most effective use of the money that's available to us.
STARMER: If they're on longer term, we could make much better use of that.
STARMER: Secondly, they're saying if you could do what the Conservatives promised but didn't actually do, which is to stop no-fault evictions, that would have a massive help for councils as well.
STARMER: Because when people lose their home through no fault of their own, quite a lot of them end up having to have support of a local authority.
STARMER: I don't think you should have no-fault evictions.
STARMER: I think we should actually get on and get rid of them.
STARMER: That's what the Prime Minister used to say, but he doesn't do it.
QUESTIONER_0: But on your point about council funding, a multi-year funding plan doesn't give more money, necessarily.
QUESTIONER_0: Are you saying there is more money that would come to local authorities under a Labour government?
STARMER: If you go for a three-year settlement it means the available money can be used better because any council leader will tell you that trying to make the best use of the money within the constraints of a 12-month period doesn't work.
STARMER: So it's better use of existing money.
STARMER: But look, I'm not going to stand here and say there's some magic wand that I can wave the day after the election and find money that isn't there.
STARMER: Huge damage has been done to our economy.
STARMER: It is going to take time.
STARMER: That's why our manifesto is a manifesto for growing our economy, for creating wealth, to making sure that we can make sure all of our public services, whether that's councils or others,
STARMER: are properly funded, providing the services that people expect and actually, frankly, deserve, which is not the case at the moment.
QUESTIONER_0: Let's get Rishi Sunak's response.
QUESTIONER_0: How will you help councils after Nottingham City Council has effectively gone bankrupt?
SUNAK: Karen, my first job in government was being local government minister, so I was responsible for councils, and they do an extraordinary job.
SUNAK: And much as people focus on national politics, actually, most politics is local.
SUNAK: It's what's happening in your street, your neighborhood, your community.
SUNAK: And the services that you mentioned are so important, particularly those that concern families and children.
SUNAK: One of the things that I do want to do is actually roll out family hubs.
SUNAK: as we've been doing over the past few years, which are special places where whole families can come and get the advice and support they need, particularly the most vulnerable families.
SUNAK: Again, in terms of funding councils, we've recently announced just over half a billion pounds of extra funding for councils, particularly for social care, which is where some of the big pressures are, and children's services, which you alluded to.
SUNAK: And we'll continue to work with councils to provide them the support they need.
SUNAK: But you mentioned Nottingham, right?
SUNAK: And that is a glimpse of the future.
SUNAK: Nottingham City Council bankrupt under Labour.
SUNAK: Birmingham City Council, the largest council in the country, in fact the largest in Europe, not just bankrupt but as a result everyone in Birmingham is now paying a 20% higher council tax bill.
SUNAK: And that is a snapshot of what will happen if Keir Starmer is in power across the country.
SUNAK: As Labour always do, they run out of everyone's money, they bankrupt the economy in 2010, they bankrupted Birmingham, they bankrupted Nottingham, and that's why everyone in Birmingham is paying a 20% higher council tax.
SUNAK: So that is just an appetiser of the higher taxes that are going to come under a future Labour government.
SUNAK: Do not surrender your local council and our finances to them.
QUESTIONER_0: Councils like Working and Thurrock were conservative when similar problems first emerged.
STARMER: What do you say about that?
STARMER: Conservative councils in exactly the same problem.
STARMER: What do you say about that?
STARMER: I have to say, a Prime Minister gloating about the fact that councils are struggling and the impact that you know of, he's responsible for gloating.
SUNAK: You have to believe me, you can go and check as a result of their financial mismanagement.
SUNAK: The same thing happened in Nottingham, right?
SUNAK: That's what you get with the Labour Party.
SUNAK: You remember what happened last time they were in office?
SUNAK: They run out of your money, they bankrupt the country, and you all pay for it in higher taxes.
SUNAK: And that is the choice for you at this election.
SUNAK: We are making progress.
SUNAK: The economy is growing.
SUNAK: Taxes are now coming down.
SUNAK: The financial security that you want, I can deliver.
SUNAK: But if we put all that progress at risk with them, your family finances are going to get hammered.
SUNAK: Your taxes are going to get whacked up.
SUNAK: And that is the choice for you at this election.
SUNAK: Do not surrender to their tax rises.
QUESTIONER_0: OK.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you both.
QUESTIONER_0: Just before we get to the next question, I'm going to remind everyone watching that we have got more questions coming in this prime ministerial debate.
QUESTIONER_0: But online on the BBC Live page, you'll be able to see what BBC verify
QUESTIONER_0: are already doing, they're already fact-checking and assessing the claims made here and will continue to do so throughout the time we are on air.
QUESTIONER_0: Our next question is from Robert Blackstock.
QUESTIONER_6: Good evening, gentlemen.
QUESTIONER_6: Mr Sunak, I think you made a fair job of being Chancellor, but you're a pretty mediocre Prime Minister.
QUESTIONER_6: Sakhir, I think that your strings are being pulled by very senior members of the Labour Party.
QUESTIONER_6: Are you two really the best we've got to be the next Prime Minister of our great country?
SUNAK: Well, Rob, look, I can understand your frustration, everyone's frustration, because the last few years have not been easy.
SUNAK: We've dealt with a lot as a country.
SUNAK: I'm not saying we've got everything right.
SUNAK: I certainly would be the first to acknowledge that.
SUNAK: But I've been your prime minister for 18 months.
SUNAK: And in that time, we've got inflation down from 11% with all the damage it was doing to the cost of living back to target.
SUNAK: The economy in the first quarter of this year, fastest growing in the G7.
SUNAK: Wages rising faster than prices for almost a year now.
SUNAK: And my primary job was to deliver that economic stability so I could start cutting your taxes.
SUNAK: That is the journey we're now on.
SUNAK: So whatever your other frustrations, the choice for you at this election is about the future.
SUNAK: If you want lower taxes,
SUNAK: If you want your borders secure, as Steve was asking before, if you want a sensible approach to net zero, if you want your pension protected with a triple lock plus, that is what I will D for you.
SUNAK: This is a serious election with consequences for you and your family.
SUNAK: I get the frustrations, but think about the choice.
SUNAK: Allow me to finish the job I've started, cut your taxes, protect your pension, secure our borders.
SUNAK: Because if Keir Starmer and the Labour Party are in charge, your taxes are going up, our borders are going to be insecure, you're going to be saddled with bills as he reverses my net zero changes, and every pensioner is going to face a retirement tax for the first time in history.
SUNAK: And that is the choice that you should have in your mind.
SUNAK: Robert...
STARMER: Robert, earlier in my career I worked in Northern Ireland with the police in Northern Ireland as part of the work out of the Good Friday Agreement and with a team I set out to change the police service in Northern Ireland to make sure it gained the confidence of all communities in Northern Ireland which was a really important part of the peace process.
STARMER: So I went, I said what we would do and we delivered.
STARMER: I then ran the Crown Prosecution Service for five years with 7,000 staff.
STARMER: I said we would improve the way we dealt with violence against women and girls.
STARMER: I said we'd do it.
STARMER: We made the change, and we got on with it, and we made that change, and it was more successful at the end.
STARMER: I came into the Labour Party to lead it four and a half years ago, and I said we will change our party to make sure that we are a party that can put a credible proposition before the country for changing the country, and that we'll always say, always say, country first, party second.
STARMER: I've been there, I've done it, I've changed it.
STARMER: What I'm now asking for is the opportunity to change our country for the better.
STARMER: Because we've had 14 pretty awful years.
STARMER: 14 years when I think most people would say we've ended up now with almost everything not working very well.
STARMER: Worse than it was 14 years ago when this government came in.
STARMER: Most people not feeling better off.
STARMER: And this is a choice election.
STARMER: Because if we go on for another five years of this under
STARMER: that is not going to change.
STARMER: That isn't going to change.
STARMER: So this is the opportunity to turn the page, to rebuild our country, rebuild our public services, rebuild our economy and make sure that we can genuinely say to ourselves we're a better country, better run, proper public services and people feel better off.
STARMER: I've done that sort of change throughout my life, and I'm asking for the opportunity to now do it for the country.
QUESTIONER_0: I'm just going to come back to the question, because I suspect that Robert Blackstock knows your background.
QUESTIONER_0: He certainly knows that you've been Chancellor.
QUESTIONER_0: He's probably familiar with your arguments, and he still says, are you two really the best?
QUESTIONER_0: We've got to be the next Prime Minister of our great country.
QUESTIONER_0: Now, polling does suggest that there's no great enthusiasm for either of you.
QUESTIONER_0: Do you recognise that?
QUESTIONER_0: Do you hear it on the campaign trail?
QUESTIONER_0: Are you aware of that?
SUNAK: Michelle, that's what I said.
SUNAK: I said to Rob, I recognise his frustrations.
QUESTIONER_0: It's more personal than that, isn't it?
SUNAK: He's talking about both of you.
SUNAK: But there's a choice for everyone.
SUNAK: There's a choice for everyone.
SUNAK: about change.
SUNAK: You don't get change unless you have a plan to deliver change.
SUNAK: Just saying it isn't going to bring about any change.
SUNAK: As you have heard tonight, there is no plan to cut your taxes, no plan to reform the welfare bill, no plan to deal with illegal migration.
SUNAK: That is the reality of it.
SUNAK: Yes, there will be change.
SUNAK: It won't be change you like, it will be change when your taxes are going up, when we become the soft touch of Europe for illegal migrants, when pensioners are paying
SUNAK: tax for the first time.
SUNAK: That's the change that is coming.
SUNAK: So don't surrender to that, because your families are going to pay the price.
STARMER: I think this question of enthusiasm is really important that you put to us, because I'm not surprised that after 14 years of this, people feel that the hope's been beaten out of them, because the country is in such a state.
STARMER: They've had loads of promises made to them at the last election about what would happen, which haven't been delivered on.
STARMER: and beat the hope out of people.
STARMER: The very first question was about integrity in politics.
STARMER: And again, people haven't seen that integrity.
STARMER: You've had Partygate, you've had the breach of COVID rules, you've had the contracts for COVID, the instinct of some people to think the first thing in COVID I'm going to do is try to make money.
STARMER: Same with the gambling commission nonsense over the last few weeks.
STARMER: So this is an opportunity to restore that hope.
STARMER: I don't think we can do that by making grand promises of things that can't be delivered.
STARMER: I think it's the ordinary hope of working people.
STARMER: My family was working class.
STARMER: The ordinary hope of getting on yourself, getting on for your family, getting on for your community, and getting on for your country.
STARMER: It has to be rooted, if we're going to restore hope, in my view, in returning politics to service.
STARMER: Thank you.
STARMER: The sense that you come into politics to serve.
QUESTIONER_0: On that note, our next question, which is from Rachel Webster.
QUESTIONER_9: Good evening.
QUESTIONER_9: How can I ensure that if I vote for either of you two men, you'll put women's interests first?
STARMER: Kirsten.
STARMER: Thank you very much for that question.
STARMER: I have in my team, as partners with me, very, very good, strong women that will deliver for the country.
STARMER: Rachel Reeves would be the first woman Chancellor if we're elected into government.
STARMER: She worked, as you know, in the Bank of England and is very, very keen and strong on the fiscal rules and what we need to do for our economy.
STARMER: I've got Angela Rayner, my deputy, who, again, has an incredible background, coming from a difficult background, where, you know, was a care worker for many years, and now deputy leader of my party.
STARMER: And I'm very proud of her.
STARMER: And, you know, these people, and there are plenty of others, Yvette Cooper, Bridget Phillips, and you name it, really good, strong women who will be part of my team.
STARMER: I think that leadership is about empowering your team and making sure it's a team on the pitch.
STARMER: that are all batting and working together.
STARMER: And that's the way I lead, not suggesting for a moment that I'm the one with all the answers, but knowing that if I lead my team and bring my team into this, and we work as a team and we'll serve as a team if we get the opportunity to do so, I will do it with some really fantastic, wonderful women who have been on this journey for me for four and a half years, changing our party to put it before the country with that, you know, essential principle, country first, party second.
QUESTIONER_0: Rishi Sunak, how would you ensure you'd put women's interests first?
SUNAK: Yeah, so I didn't catch... Rachel.
SUNAK: Rachel.
SUNAK: Rachel.
SUNAK: You know, probably the easiest thing I can tell you is that I have two young daughters.
SUNAK: And that's why you can trust me, because as a dad, first and foremost, rather than a politician or prime minister, I want them to grow up in a country which is safe,
SUNAK: for them when they become teenagers and can walk around on their own, making sure that we have the right police on the streets, that our communities are safe for women and girls is really important to me.
SUNAK: I want to make sure that they have the health that they need and that's why we've been making changes to things like HRT and maternity care in hospitals, but I also want to make sure that when they grow up and have jobs and start a family that they're supported too.
SUNAK: which is why we're rolling out 30 hours of free childcare for every working parent from the time that their little one is nine months old to when the toddler goes off to school at four years, and that will make a big difference to families up and down the country.
SUNAK: But that's why I said, so I can go into lots more policies, but I want my girls to grow up in a country where the sky is the limit for their ambitions.
SUNAK: There is nothing that they can't do because they're women, and that's the kind of place that I believe in.
QUESTIONER_0: I'm going to bring in a related question because this came to us via the BBC's Your Voice, Your Vote website.
QUESTIONER_0: It was from Vicky in Oxfordshire who asks this, will you protect women's right to single sex spaces from any and all males regardless of if they hold a GRC, a gender recognition certificate?
QUESTIONER_0: Rishi Sunak?
SUNAK: Yes, unequivocally, and we will do that by changing the law so that the Old Equalities Act recognises that sex means biological sex, and that will allow us to deliver on what Vicky wants, which is to protect female-only spaces, female-only services.
SUNAK: It's crystal clear for you there is a choice on that question at this election, because Keir Starmer is not matched
SUNAK: my pledge to reform the Equalities Act, to pass new law.
SUNAK: That is the only way to deliver on what Vicky says.
SUNAK: And the reason he won't do that, I don't know, but he can explain, is because he's not sure, like I am, that when it comes to these matters, sex means biological sex, and that's how you protect female-only spaces and services.
QUESTIONER_0: Keir Starmer?
STARMER: Yes is the answer to the question.
STARMER: It's very important that we protect women's spaces.
STARMER: I saw this firsthand when I was Chief Prosecutor back in 2008-2013.
STARMER: I was working with groups who were supportive of women who'd been subjected to domestic violence and sexual violence and saw for myself just how important it is to have those women's spaces.
STARMER: Same in hospitals and
STARMER: Um, in sport.
STARMER: So, yes to that answer.
STARMER: But what I will also say is that I do recognize that there are a small number of people who are born into a gender that they don't identify with, and I will treat them as I treat all human beings with dignity and respect.
STARMER: And I'll tell you for why...
STARMER: I'll tell you for why.
STARMER: Because if you don't, you end up
STARMER: the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom standing in Parliament making an anti-trans joke in front of the mother of a murdered trans teenager.
STARMER: I will never, ever allow myself to be put into that position.
SUNAK: That's not what I did.
SUNAK: I was pointing out that you've changed your mind on this question multiple times.
SUNAK: But to answer Vicky's question, you can't deliver on what Vicky wants.
SUNAK: So everyone who does want female spaces protected
SUNAK: has to be prepared to change the laws that the Equalities Act recognizes that sex means biological sex.
SUNAK: It's pretty straightforward.
SUNAK: Now, Keir Starmer says that he believes in that, but he won't change the law to do it.
SUNAK: So he's not being straight with you again.
SUNAK: By saying one thing and doing another, you won't change the law to recognize that sex means biological sex.
SUNAK: So you cannot say to Vicky and everyone else who cares about this issue that you will actually ensure that their spaces are protected.
STARMER: If he'd been in as many support centers that I've been in for those that have survived sexual violence and domestic violence, he would know very well it is possible to do it.
STARMER: It is being done.
STARMER: I've supported it being done when I was chief prosecutor.
STARMER: I've always believed in that principle of women's spaces.
STARMER: That's by going back to 2008, way before this latest iteration of the debate, because I could recognize for myself just how important it was to have that space, women-only space, biological women-only space,
STARMER: particularly in that area, but also in other areas.
QUESTIONER_0: How do you ensure it?
QUESTIONER_0: Just a second.
QUESTIONER_0: I mean, Rishi Sunak, how do you ensure it without changing the Equality Act?
STARMER: It's provided for under the Equality Act.
STARMER: It is actually spelled out as one of the examples given in the Act.
STARMER: It always has been.
STARMER: and fabricating a difference here in a situation where actually we should be trying to find common ground and work together.
STARMER: Well, I'm proud of the record of my party on women's rights.
STARMER: We've done amazing things in terms of equality under Labour governments, made a massive difference to millions of lives.
STARMER: There's much more work to do on women's equality going forward.
STARMER: But the only way I think we can make that progress
STARMER: is if we change the way that we do politics, stop this business of always trying to divide everybody and actually use the opportunity of leadership, which is what I would do, to say the job of the leader of the country is to bring people together.
STARMER: These are difficult discussions, different opinions of course, but the role of the leader of the country
STARMER: is to bring that together so that the country itself is less divided.
STARMER: One of the issues for me is the, with sadness, is the fact that over the last 14 years there's been this tendency on almost every issue to try to find the points of difference and division rather than doing what we're actually really good at as a country, which is bringing people together.
SUNAK: This is about the courage of your convictions and principles.
SUNAK: I believe when it comes to these matters, sex means biological sex.
SUNAK: Of course, we should have compassion and tolerance for people who are going through questioning that.
SUNAK: But fundamentally, when it comes to women's safety, women's only spaces, sex means biological sex for me.
SUNAK: That is the only way to make sure you can deliver the protections that Vicky wants.
SUNAK: And on this question, Keir Starmer, when one of his own female MPs made that point a while ago, he said that she was wrong.
SUNAK: She was hounded, right?
SUNAK: He said she was wrong.
SUNAK: Now, he's now changed his mind on that question, that it goes back to trust, it goes back to having the courage of your convictions.
SUNAK: I get that not all of you will agree with my position, right?
SUNAK: But I'm being clear with you.
SUNAK: Sex means biological sex.
SUNAK: You have to change the Equalities Act to deliver the security of women's spaces and women's services.
SUNAK: That's what I believe the right thing for our country is.
QUESTIONER_0: And if you don't agree with that last part, that's what I will do.
QUESTIONER_0: Which relates to one of your MPs, Rosie Duffield.
STARMER: The Prime Minister knows perfectly well that this is already set out in the Equalities Act already.
STARMER: The specific instance of safe spaces is set out.
STARMER: Read the legislation.
STARMER: Look at the notes under the legislation.
STARMER: It's been there for years.
STARMER: Don't just use this as a political football to try to divide people across the country.
QUESTIONER_0: OK.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you very much for that.
QUESTIONER_0: We will move on to our next question.
QUESTIONER_0: And this one is from Judy Waters.
QUESTIONER_10: Good evening, gents.
QUESTIONER_10: I own a jazz vinyl record business with my partner.
QUESTIONER_10: Post Brexit, we have lost 90% of our business with Europe.
QUESTIONER_10: How can we mend our broken trading relationship with Europe?
QUESTIONER_0: 90% of Julie's business with Europe has been lost.
QUESTIONER_0: Now, Keir Starmer, you were a Remainer.
QUESTIONER_0: Rishi Sunak, you argued and voted for leave.
QUESTIONER_0: How can we mend our broken trading relationship with Europe?
SUNAK: Well, Julie, first of all, thank you for doing what you do.
SUNAK: My mum was also a small business owner.
SUNAK: I grew up in a family that had a family business.
SUNAK: I know how hard it is.
SUNAK: I know what the struggles are like.
SUNAK: And our economy is built on people like you.
SUNAK: And you deserve all our support and admiration and praise for doing what you are doing.
SUNAK: I'm sorry things have been difficult.
SUNAK: We had the referendum, and now our focus should be on making sure we make the best of all the opportunities.
SUNAK: In an economy-wide sense, we're actually doing very well now at exporting around the world.
SUNAK: But in order to help you, I have two specific things that I can do that will help.
SUNAK: One of them is to make sure that we cut your taxes on business rates.
SUNAK: When I talk to small retailers like yours, I think you said you had a premises, the thing that everyone talks to me about is business rates.
SUNAK: That's why we've cut business rates for small retail restaurants, pubs, shops across the country and Labour on Wales, they haven't done that, so everyone's taxes are going up.
QUESTIONER_0: Julie's question is about mending the trading relationship with Europe.
SUNAK: And the second thing we'll do for you, for all those people like you who are self-employed and others in small businesses, I want to abolish your national insurance so that you have more financial security.
SUNAK: Now, I'm the person that has made sure that we have good relations with Europe.
SUNAK: You can all see that.
SUNAK: And we will continue to do so.
SUNAK: But the best way I can help your small business and the hundreds of thousands of others like yours is to continue to cut your taxes, because that's how we'll give you financial security.
SUNAK: That's the choice for you at this election.
SUNAK: He says he's going to cut National Insurance.
STARMER: That's £46 billion.
STARMER: £46 billion has just been spent in the last minute without saying where that money is coming from.
STARMER: That money on National Insurance is used for our NHS and for our pensions.
STARMER: So, Prime Minister, if you're going to cut that money, that National Insurance, those £46 billion, is it the NHS or is it our pensioners that are going to pay for it?
QUESTIONER_0: So far, neither of you have answered Julie's question, which is about how we can mend our broken trading relationship with Europe.
STARMER: Let me address that, because the Prime Minister says, I think he's just said the economy is all very well, going very well.
STARMER: I don't think millions of people across the country feel it's going very well.
STARMER: I was saying our export performance.
STARMER: They think it's going very badly and it's hitting them.
STARMER: But Julie,
STARMER: In relation to the EU, I did vote to remain, I campaigned to remain, but we left.
STARMER: We've left the EU, we're not going back to the EU.
STARMER: But I do not accept that we can't get a better deal than the one that we've got, because too many businesses are in the position you're in, which is, you know, you put yourself into your business, you put your money into your business, you take huge risks for your business, and I think you should be supported.
STARMER: So we want to...
STARMER: to get a better deal in trade relations with the EU.
STARMER: I think Boris Johnson botched it.
STARMER: He just wanted to say he could get a deal across the line.
STARMER: So we can get a better deal.
STARMER: I think a trading deal, I'd also like a better deal on research and development, where I think if we work together, it will be better for the country, and a better deal when it comes to security and defence, particularly in light of what's happened in Ukraine.
QUESTIONER_0: OK, the key thing for Julie is the trade part, so I want to ask what she's saying.
QUESTIONER_0: There's something very important that Keir Starmer's just said.
QUESTIONER_0: Sorry, I'm just going to go back to the question.
QUESTIONER_0: Could we get a better trading deal with Europe?
SUNAK: You might be able to.
SUNAK: But do you know what the price of it will be?
SUNAK: It will be free movement of people.
SUNAK: And that's what Keir Starmer is not being straight with you about.
SUNAK: They might be able to sit down with the EU and the price of anything, and I know because I've sat across them for the last 18 months, negotiated the Windsor Framework for Northern Ireland, actually got us into the Horizon programme for R&D.
SUNAK: All the things he's talking about involve accepting more migrants.
SUNAK: Free movement by the back door.
SUNAK: That is the choice for you at this election.
SUNAK: If you want free movement to come back, we had Steve's question at the beginning about borders and migration, that is the price of any deal like that with the EU.
SUNAK: They have been crystal clear about that.
SUNAK: So if you want high migration, fair enough.
SUNAK: I don't think that's right.
SUNAK: I want to bring the levels of migration down.
SUNAK: I will not do any deal with the EU that increases migration when we had a referendum, and that is what I will deliver for you.
SUNAK: Not more open borders and freedom of movement.
QUESTIONER_0: There is a give and a take when you reach deals like this, and perhaps the EU will ask for freedom of movement in return for what you want.
STARMER: We are not going back into the EU.
STARMER: We're not rejoining the single market or the customs union, and we're not accepting freedom of movement.
STARMER: But I'm not a defeatist.
SUNAK: Will you accept free migration in any form?
STARMER: Please, let me finish answering the question.
STARMER: I'm not a defeatist like the Prime Minister who says to Julie, bad luck.
STARMER: That's as good as it gets.
STARMER: You'll have to go along with the problems you've got, however hard that is for you.
STARMER: I'm not in that.
STARMER: I'm not going to say to you, Julie, there's nothing I can do to help you or to other people in the same position.
STARMER: I'm going to say, I know we can get a better deal than the botched deal that we've got, and I'm going to go out and fight for it.
STARMER: I'm not going to have freedom of movement come back.
STARMER: I'm not going to go back into the EU, but I'm going to fight for a better deal so you can trade more easily across Europe, so you can succeed, and our economy can succeed, because I believe in our country.
SUNAK: In the 18 months I've had the job, I've negotiated with the EU for the Windsor Framework, restored the government in Northern Ireland and strengthened our union, made sure that we are part of the horizon scheme on positive terms, warmly welcomed by the entire research community or universities.
SUNAK: I've got a track record of doing those deals with the EU.
SUNAK: But you just say you'll get a deal.
SUNAK: What will it cost?
SUNAK: You're not being straight with people.
SUNAK: I know.
SUNAK: What it will cost is more migration.
SUNAK: He's not being straight with you.
SUNAK: You think it's just magic, magic, some good thing for us, and they won't want something in return, right?
SUNAK: It's just, again, you're taking people for fools.
SUNAK: They've been crystal clear.
SUNAK: The price of any of those things is greater migration.
SUNAK: It is fundamental to how they think about it.
QUESTIONER_0: Do you accept, Keir Starmer, if you were the Prime Minister, you would have to give something in return for the kind of deal you want with Europe?
STARMER: Yes, but I think it's very important when you start those negotiations, you're very clear the lines you won't cross.
STARMER: And I've just set out the lines that I won't cross.
STARMER: But I'm not a defeatist like the Prime Minister, and nor will I say to Julie...
STARMER: I won't insult Julie by saying, it's all fine, everything's working, everything's great.
STARMER: Part of the problem we have with this Prime Minister is that his lived world is millions of miles away from the lived worlds of individuals across the country, the businesses and the families that they're trying to support.
STARMER: There's a massive gap.
STARMER: That is a problem.
SUNAK: And again, you just won't rule out, will you accept any greater migration as the price of a deal with the EU?
SUNAK: Yes or no?
STARMER: No, I don't.
STARMER: But I would say this, that migration, lawful migration, is at record numbers under this Prime Minister.
STARMER: He's actually the most liberal Prime Minister we've ever had when it comes to immigration.
STARMER: The numbers have gone through the roof.
STARMER: They're actually far higher than they were when we were in the EU.
STARMER: So I really don't think you can start lecturing other people about higher migration.
STARMER: They've never been as high as they are on your watch.
SUNAK: Yeah, what I can do is point out the choice for everyone at this election.
SUNAK: This year, because of the actions I've taken, the number of visas we've issued is down by 30%.
SUNAK: Net migration is forecast to halve in just the next 12 months because of the measures I've taken, because it was too high.
SUNAK: But I've been Prime Minister for 18 months, now it's coming down sharply.
SUNAK: That's a progress we'll continue if I'm your Prime Minister, and we'll have a legal cap in Parliament to guarantee the numbers keep falling after that.
SUNAK: Now, if Keir Starmer's your Prime Minister, you won't get any of that.
SUNAK: Because he opposes those changes, he won't have a legal cap on migration, and it will go up.
SUNAK: So that's a choice for your legal migration.
SUNAK: Continue the progress we've made underneath.
SUNAK: It's forecast to half, legal cap in Parliament, or open borders.
SUNAK: Surrender your borders to the Labour Party.
SUNAK: He's making it up as he goes along.
SUNAK: He's making it up as he goes along.
QUESTIONER_0: And in here... Actually, hang on.
QUESTIONER_2: Our next question... No, I'm going to the... No, I'm going to the next question.
QUESTIONER_2: You get BBC verified to check.
QUESTIONER_2: I'm going to the next question.
QUESTIONER_2: Thank you, folks.
QUESTIONER_2: We just get BBC verified to check that.
QUESTIONER_2: That's no problem.
QUESTIONER_0: They're already at work.
QUESTIONER_0: Our next question is from Tasneem Zahra.
QUESTIONER_0: Hi.
QUESTIONER_0: Good evening.
QUESTIONER_11: I'm in high school and it feels like universities in the UK are churning out students year on year.
QUESTIONER_11: Tasneem, just... Yeah, just start again, cos we didn't hear the beginning.
QUESTIONER_11: Just start your question again.
QUESTIONER_11: I'm in my 20s, and it feels like universities in the UK are churning out students year on year.
QUESTIONER_11: Young people like myself have lost hope for if they will ever get a good job or buy a home.
QUESTIONER_11: Many of my peers are leaving the UK and going to countries like Australia or Dubai.
QUESTIONER_11: What would you do to make me stay in the UK?
QUESTIONER_11: Thank you, Tasneem.
QUESTIONER_0: And this is going to be the last question and set of answers.
QUESTIONER_0: Keir Starmer, what would you do to make Tasnim stay in the UK?
STARMER: ensure that we've got good, well-paid skilled jobs here for you and other young people who I do think have been let down in recent years of government, and make sure that we build the houses necessary to ensure that the dream of home ownership lives again.
STARMER: Because at the moment, it's being killed under this government.
STARMER: The average age for young people to get a house is in their 30s.
STARMER: now.
STARMER: I think it should be in the 20s, and if we have five more years of this Government it will go up to the 40s.
STARMER: But we've got to build more houses, 1.5 million houses across the country.
STARMER: That means tough decisions about planning and where those houses are going to be, but we also need to deal with the very high rents that young people are often paying.
STARMER: So many say to me, I'm paying more in rent than I've actually paid on a mortgage.
STARMER: huge proportion, but I can't save for the mortgage deposit that I need.
STARMER: And that's why we will have a low mortgage deposit scheme in place to allow young people, first-time buyers, to get on the housing ladder.
STARMER: But we've got to build the houses, 1.5 million houses.
STARMER: The Prime Minister's taken down the targets for house building.
STARMER: They're going off a cliff, sinking, and that is taking down with it your dreams and the dreams of young people across the country who can't get the job that they want.
STARMER: Very often, if they've been to college or university, are returning back home.
STARMER: We have to give them the future that they deserve.
STARMER: That means that we have to go out with our manifesto for growth, for wealth creation, and seize the opportunities of the future.
STARMER: Other countries are doing this.
STARMER: I think we should be in the race for the jobs for the future.
STARMER: I think we could win that race.
STARMER: But also, roll up our sleeves, start building the houses that are necessary to make sure that you can afford to buy a house in your 20s, not as it currently is in your 30s.
STARMER: That's the tragedy of the last 10 years.
STARMER: And it'll simply go up if we have five more years of the current government.
QUESTIONER_0: OK, Rishi Sunak, Tasneem's question.
SUNAK: Everyone who's had the opportunity to own their own home remembers what it feels like when you get the keys to your first flat.
SUNAK: And it's an incredibly special feeling.
SUNAK: I believe in a country where all young people can aspire to that and realise that ambition.
SUNAK: It's a very special thing.
SUNAK: I know it's too hard.
SUNAK: Of course, it's become too hard to buy your own home.
SUNAK: I've got two very practical, specific things that we will do, if I'm your Prime Minister, which will help make it easier.
SUNAK: The first is to reintroduce a new form of help to buy.
SUNAK: You may remember this.
SUNAK: It means that you won't have to save for the entire deposit.
SUNAK: just 5% and then you'll be able to get a help to buy loan from the government which covers another 20% so that potentially can save you tens of thousands of pounds.
SUNAK: And the second thing that we will do is effectively abolish stamp duty for first-time buyers.
SUNAK: For the vast vast majority of first-time buyers we will abolish stamp duty.
SUNAK: Those are two very practical things that will save you thousands of pounds.
SUNAK: Now, the reason that's important is, when I talk to people like you, the most important thing they tell me is, how can you help me with a deposit?
SUNAK: Because, actually, I'm probably OK and into a decent job, and I can probably afford the mortgage.
SUNAK: Right, that's actually similar to my rent, but what I can't do is save up for the deposit in time.
QUESTIONER_0: Tasneem's question was also about jobs, that young people have lost hope about ever getting a good job.
SUNAK: And by doing help to buy and abolishing stamp duty, we will massively be able to speed up how quickly you can get on the housing ladder and fulfill that dream of owning your own home.
SUNAK: I think it's incredibly important.
SUNAK: And as I said, I don't want to give you waffle, two very specific things, help to buy, abolish stamp duty, neither backed by Keir Starmer and the Labour Party.
SUNAK: So again, there's a very clear choice for you.
SUNAK: Because if he's your prime minister, stamp duty for first-time buyers is going up.
SUNAK: Right, that's what the plans are.
SUNAK: If he's your Prime Minister, stamp duty...
QUESTIONER_5: I've never unfunded commitment.
SUNAK: Again, we're back to the welfare debate.
SUNAK: I'm happy to have that again.
SUNAK: You don't think there's a penny to be made from welfare savings?
STARMER: I do, but there we go.
SUNAK: The Chancellor says the money's been spent.
SUNAK: Stamp duty and first-time donor relief for you, help to buy, help you get on the housing ladder, that's a choice for you.
STARMER: The Chancellor says the money's been spent.
STARMER: It isn't there, Prime Minister.
STARMER: The money isn't there.
STARMER: The Chancellor, not me, your Chancellor said the money's been spent.
STARMER: No, that's not what he said at all.
STARMER: You can't fund things from nothing.
STARMER: The money has been spent.
STARMER: And this is why, if we go on for another five years like this, we're going to end up exactly where we are now, or in a worse place.
STARMER: We have to turn the page and start rebuilding.
STARMER: And that means building those 1.5 million houses.
STARMER: And that's what we're determined to do with a strong plan
STARMER: behind it, already talking to the partners who will build those houses with us, because I'm absolutely determined that every single young person in this country under a Labour government will feel that the future is better for them.
STARMER: For my parents, it comforted them, even though they had tough times as parents, they didn't have a lot of money, but the thoughts, the idea that it would be better for their children comforted them
STARMER: and made their lives worthwhile.
STARMER: We've lost that, and we have to get it back, because in the end, the future is about our children and young people.
STARMER: We have to build a country, rebuild a country, that is fit for them to live in and to absolutely realise all of their aspirations and their dreams, and I'm determined that we will do that.
SUNAK: Tasneem, your question is fundamentally the reason I got into politics.
SUNAK: My grandparents emigrated to this country with very little.
SUNAK: Two generations later, I have the enormous privilege of standing here as your Prime Minister.
SUNAK: I don't think my story would be possible in any other country, and that's why I feel an enormous sense of duty and gratitude to our country for what it's done for me.
SUNAK: And I'm in politics to make a difference, to make people's lives better.
SUNAK: And that starts with young people, making sure you have the opportunities you need to succeed in life, whatever you want to do, wherever you live.
SUNAK: That's the type of country I believe in.
SUNAK: And when you get that job, when you work hard, I want you to keep more of your hard-earned money, decide how to spend it for yourself.
SUNAK: I believe in a society that's aspirational.
SUNAK: That's why I want to cut your taxes.
SUNAK: It's not just a technocratic thing.
SUNAK: It's a type of country, I believe in.
SUNAK: It's one where your hard work is rewarded, your aspirations are supported, and that's what I'm in this to deliver for you, and that's what I will do as your Prime Minister.
QUESTIONER_0: We are just about out of time in here.
QUESTIONER_0: That was the final question of the evening.
QUESTIONER_0: In a moment, we're going to be joining Laura Koonsberg and Clive Myrie over
QUESTIONER_0: in the spin room for some more analysis, but before we leave you from here, Rishi Sunak and Keir Starmer are going to have 30 seconds each to leave you with a final thought, and the order in which they will speak was decided earlier by a coin toss.
QUESTIONER_0: First to speak is going to be Rishi Sunak.
SUNAK: I understand why you're frustrated with our party.
SUNAK: With me, I get it.
SUNAK: But this is not a by-election.
SUNAK: It's a choice with profound consequences for you and our country.
SUNAK: And before you make that choice, think what a Labour government would mean.
SUNAK: Can you afford to pay at least £2,000 more in tax?
SUNAK: And why won't Keir Starmer be straight with you about what he wants to do?
SUNAK: And if you are not certain about Labour, don't surrender to them.
SUNAK: Don't vote for any other party.
SUNAK: Vote Conservative.
QUESTIONER_2: That was a lie.
STARMER: Thank you very much.
STARMER: He's been told not to repeat that lie and he's just done it.
QUESTIONER_0: And this is your closing statement, Keir Starmer.
STARMER: Thank you very much.
STARMER: My message to you is simple.
STARMER: If you want your NHS back, you have to vote for it.
STARMER: If you want a growing economy, you have to vote for it.
STARMER: If you want more police on our streets, more teachers in our schools, you have to vote for it.
STARMER: If you want to end 14 years of chaos and rebuild our country, then that power is in your hands.
STARMER: On July the 4th, vote change, vote Labour.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you very much.
QUESTIONER_0: And that brings to an end this last head-to-head debate of the election campaign.
