QUESTIONER_0: Now, Charles Kennedy for the Liberal Democrats will go first.
QUESTIONER_0: Then Michael Howard for the Conservative Party.
QUESTIONER_0: And finally, Tony Blair, Prime Minister for the Labour Party.
QUESTIONER_0: So,
QUESTIONER_0: Will our first challenger sign in, please?
QUESTIONER_0: All right.
QUESTIONER_0: Our first question, Mr Kennedy, comes from James Gray, please.
QUESTIONER_1: How am I supposed to understand your economic policies if you don't, and if you do, can't explain them coherently?
KENNEDY: Yes, certainly.
KENNEDY: I think this may be a reference to the morning after the morning after our baby was born, which perhaps wasn't the most adept time for me to hold a 7.30 in the morning press conference.
KENNEDY: But I can give you the position...
KENNEDY: The Prime Minister had a baby when he was Prime Minister.
QUESTIONER_0: Gordon Brown had a baby when he was Chancellor of the Exchequer.
KENNEDY: They didn't freak out.
KENNEDY: No, but they didn't launch a national election campaign 36 hours later either.
KENNEDY: They had a more decent period of paternity leave than was available to me, unfortunately.
KENNEDY: However, what we're basically saying in this campaign as Liberal Democrats, we want a fair tax system and we want the proceeds of that tax applied fairly in the country.
KENNEDY: We're saying that if you want to get rid of student top-up fees and tuition fees,
KENNEDY: If you want older people to enjoy free long-term care if they are suffering from Alzheimer's or Parkinson's with washing, feeding or dressing, and if you want to put money in to get rid of the council tax and replace it with a fair system of local tax based on people's ability to pay,
KENNEDY: a 1% number of people, the 1% top income taxpayers, to achieve all those things, they would see their top rate of tax go up to 50p for every pound above £100,000 income.
KENNEDY: That's still less than the same people were paying.
KENNEDY: For most of the period, Mrs Thatcher was Prime Minister and the top rate of taxpayers felt they had quite a good deal with her.
KENNEDY: James Gray, does that explain it?
QUESTIONER_1: Yeah, I think so.
QUESTIONER_2: You, sir, yeah?
QUESTIONER_2: And are you worried that the local income tax...
QUESTIONER_2: which will affect people who earn roughly more than £40,000, as I understand it, will take away potential sort of middle-class voters from the Conservatives to vote for you, and they'll obviously decide they don't want to do that.
KENNEDY: Well, if you have a household income in the region of £42,000, when you begin to get above that, you will pay more.
KENNEDY: That's about a quarter of people in this country do pay more under our local tax proposals.
KENNEDY: But the Institute of Fiscal Studies today has been looking at all three parties, their views on these and other matters.
KENNEDY: They say that 70% of people will benefit from our local income tax proposals.
KENNEDY: The big winners, let's be honest about this, will be pensioners.
KENNEDY: Six million pensioners will be taken out of local tax altogether.
KENNEDY: But there will be losers, and we've been quite honest with people.
KENNEDY: You've got two parties on offer at this election, Labour and Conservative, applying different forms of sticking plaster to council tax.
KENNEDY: We say you've got to do something about the wound.
KENNEDY: you've got to heal the wound.
KENNEDY: And at least we've been honest enough, and I think brave enough, to come forward with a new local tax proposal.
KENNEDY: We argue it's favour, it's fairer, but we don't try and pretend, whatever system you have, that some people will be better off as a result, others will be worse off, but the vast majority will be better off.
QUESTIONER_0: But you hit people on modest incomes, couples on modest incomes, quite hard.
QUESTIONER_0: The average... Is it a way to go into an election?
QUESTIONER_0: 25% of the population are going to pay more tax?
KENNEDY: 75% unaffected or better off.
KENNEDY: But do remember, it is part of the package.
KENNEDY: It is also related, going back to the first question, to what many of those households also gain in terms of if they have students at university, no fees, if they have elderly parents, help that is not available at the moment.
KENNEDY: It is a deal.
KENNEDY: The lady with spectacles.
QUESTIONER_3: If you went onto your website and I worked out, in my area, a Band D property, double income, would be £33,000.
QUESTIONER_3: You've only got to earn that and then you would pay more.
QUESTIONER_3: That is not a lot of money in the South East when you're already saddled with high mortgages.
KENNEDY: No, as I say, the typical figure...
QUESTIONER_3: APPLAUSE ..£33,000 is an awful lot less than £42,000.
KENNEDY: Now, 42 is the typical figure for across the country as a whole, and this has been looked at by outside experts.
QUESTIONER_0: But what about in the South East?
QUESTIONER_0: The ladies from the South East, the economics of the South East are different.
QUESTIONER_0: What percentage of people in the South East will pay higher tax?
KENNEDY: It varies from one local authority area to another.
KENNEDY: Of course, but on average in the South East as a whole?
KENNEDY: Well, the average figure for the country as a whole is £450 savings per household.
KENNEDY: But you're right to look at our website.
KENNEDY: That's why we've made all this available, and I'd encourage people to watch it.
KENNEDY: Mr. Kennedy.
KENNEDY: Yes, I do.
KENNEDY: Let's make your point again.
QUESTIONER_3: Ordinary families are going to have to pay a lot more, and that's an awful lot more families than you're saying.
KENNEDY: No, it's a quarter of households.
KENNEDY: Now, that is the official figure.
QUESTIONER_3: In the whole country, if you're in the Outer Hebrides, I can believe you probably pay less.
KENNEDY: No, it's not.
KENNEDY: Have you worked out the geographical effect of this, Mr. Kennedy?
KENNEDY: It's all detailed on the website.
KENNEDY: Can you give me the answer?
KENNEDY: I have the south-east income figure for you, which is the one you can base it on.
KENNEDY: The average salary in the south-east is an awful lot lower than people imagine.
KENNEDY: It's £27,000 a year.
KENNEDY: The woman here.
QUESTIONER_4: By charging a higher rate of income tax on higher salaries,
QUESTIONER_0: No?
QUESTIONER_0: Done?
QUESTIONER_0: OK, come to you instead.
QUESTIONER_0: Come back to you later.
QUESTIONER_5: Keeping with the theme you started off with, congratulations, you've just had your first child.
QUESTIONER_5: Thank you.
QUESTIONER_5: Are you aware that a CBBC survey of children found that 95% of them state that they've suffered bullying in our school system?
QUESTIONER_5: And would you support the idea of a national anti-bullying centre for children?
QUESTIONER_0: Well, that's a different question.
QUESTIONER_0: Do you want to answer that briefly?
KENNEDY: What I'd say, the bullying problem is a terrible problem.
KENNEDY: You need more playground supervision.
KENNEDY: You need more involvement of the parents.
QUESTIONER_5: I think there's no compulsory set-up inside our school system.
QUESTIONER_5: It's left down to the heads.
QUESTIONER_0: Hold on, let's not go to that, because I want to stick on the question you were asked originally.
QUESTIONER_0: Anybody else got a point on that?
QUESTIONER_0: Yes, the woman there.
QUESTIONER_6: Do you think another percentage tax on our earnings could possibly put people off earning a higher salary?
KENNEDY: No, I don't think it will, in all honesty.
KENNEDY: Nobody's talking about a return to the days in the 1970s in this country when the top income earners were on 90 plus, 95% plus levels of tax.
KENNEDY: That was crazy.
KENNEDY: That caused a brain drain, a loss of talent and money to the country.
KENNEDY: And do remember that the people you're talking about here, those top rate taxpayers, 1% of people,
KENNEDY: They've got children that they want to put through university.
KENNEDY: They've got elderly parents that they're caring about.
KENNEDY: They benefit from the wider policies that we're putting forward.
KENNEDY: So I think it's a fairer system.
KENNEDY: There must be something wrong, surely, that after eight years of a Labour government, and let's face it,
KENNEDY: They've had a pretty benign economic backdrop over those eight years.
KENNEDY: The poorest people in our society, with direct and indirect tax, now pay, still pay, a higher proportion of their household income in tax than do the very top earners.
KENNEDY: Now, I don't think that's a fair society.
OK.
QUESTIONER_0: We'll move on to another question.
QUESTIONER_0: Daniel Shaik, please.
QUESTIONER_0: Daniel Shaik.
QUESTIONER_7: If you were to go ahead with plans to withdraw British troops from Iraq, how would you guarantee the security of Iraqis?
KENNEDY: First of all, yes, we are the only party...
KENNEDY: Your plan is to move out by Christmas?
KENNEDY: That's right.
KENNEDY: The UN mandate, the current United Nations mandate for the occupying forces expires at the end of this calendar year.
KENNEDY: And we have argued, we're the only party arguing this, obviously in the election, that we believe there should now be a phased withdrawal of British troops with that deadline in mind.
KENNEDY: I think, obviously, we profoundly disagreed with the decision to go to war in Iraq.
KENNEDY: And I think everybody knows that.
KENNEDY: We were the only party that opposed it in Parliament.
KENNEDY: We are where we are.
KENNEDY: We have got 8,000 British service personnel still out there in Iraq.
KENNEDY: And I'll tell you what made me angry today, because this issue has been, as you know, in the headlines.
KENNEDY: When the Prime Minister said this morning that the published advice of the Attorney General, which had to be absolutely dragged from him, we've been calling for this for the last year and a half, represented a damp squib.
KENNEDY: I say to Tony Blair, go and describe these findings as a damp squib to the families of the British service personnel who gave their lives in Iraq, and to the innocent Iraqi citizens who were killed.
QUESTIONER_0: The question was how you would guarantee the security of the Iraqis if the elected Iraqi government asked British troops to stay.
QUESTIONER_0: Would you pull them out and say, to hell, we are not interested, wash our hands of all this?
KENNEDY: I am afraid that amongst the many principled arguments we put forward against the war, it was the fact that one sovereign country, without international
KENNEDY: mandate could go and invade another sovereign country and regime change that sovereign country.
KENNEDY: We're all pleased to see the back of Saddam, but this was never the way to go about it.
KENNEDY: Therefore, it is becoming a sovereign state, it has the right to take its own decisions, and I personally now don't believe, nearly two years and more after the event, that the continuing presence of occupying troops offers the Iraqis a better long-term solution.
KENNEDY: I think we should come home.
QUESTIONER_0: Of course, Saddam would still be there if you had your way.
KENNEDY: Not necessarily so.
KENNEDY: The Iraq survey group said, when they looked at the country at the time, that the military, the ethnic breakdown, and the financial circumstances or such, that had he been exposed, had the weapons inspectors been given time, and we'd found out, in Iraq and outside Iraq, he didn't have weapons of mass destruction, his biggest club to maintain his power base would have been gone.
KENNEDY: That's the tragedy of the situation.
KENNEDY: Do you believe that?
KENNEDY: Do you believe he'd have gone?
KENNEDY: I think the Iraq survey group, who are closer to this than any of us, said that the conditions were there for an implosion of the regime.
KENNEDY: The woman at the back.
QUESTIONER_8: You talked about sovereignty.
QUESTIONER_8: Do you think sovereignty is absolute?
QUESTIONER_8: Do you think whatever someone does to their own people, they're allowed to do that?
KENNEDY: Well, I think that under the United Nations Charter, if our country is attacked by another country, we have a right to defend ourselves.
KENNEDY: What we don't have a right to do under the United Nations Charter is simply, without UN authority, go into another country and change its government.
KENNEDY: Because if we didn't like governments, and there's many around the world we don't do, where do you stop?
KENNEDY: Are we going to start a war in Zimbabwe, for example, because Mugabe is a murderous dictator?
KENNEDY: Are we going to invade North Korea?
KENNEDY: Where does it stop?
KENNEDY: The world order breaks down.
QUESTIONER_0: We went into Kosovo.
KENNEDY: We did, but there was... And you supported that?
KENNEDY: We did support the entry into Kosovo.
KENNEDY: Isn't that an illogical position?
KENNEDY: No, we supported the government's action over Afghanistan.
KENNEDY: We're not viewing this from some...
QUESTIONER_0: But you said without the United Nations agreement.
QUESTIONER_0: There was no United Nations agreement in Kosovo.
KENNEDY: Well, the issue about Kosovo was the position of the Russians at the time, and although the Russians couldn't bring themselves to vote for that...
QUESTIONER_0: The position of the French on Iraq, exactly the same.
KENNEDY: What's the difference?
KENNEDY: No, the position was not the same, because the international community was so shattered, not just at Security Council level, but within the UN generally.
KENNEDY: OK, you, sir.
QUESTIONER_9: So, you're honestly saying that if the Iraqi government come to you at Christmas and say, we need British troops to stay in Iraq, you will just disregard what they say and pull them out?
KENNEDY: I'm afraid to say I think the responsibility for a British government at this stage, two years after the event, with the loss of life we've suffered, with the amount of innocent civilians in Iraq, that we have been...
QUESTIONER_9: But surely more innocent civilians will die if you pull the troops out.
KENNEDY: Well, we don't even...
KENNEDY: I have to say to you...
KENNEDY: I don't think that will be the case because I think that the occupying troops, the Americans more than the British it has to be said, but the very presence of occupying troops is acting as a force for the insurrectionists within Iraq.
KENNEDY: But do remember when you say, wouldn't more Iraqis died, we can't even turn round as a country and say how many innocent Iraqis did die because we've never bothered to do the body count.
KENNEDY: When I say not in my name, Mr Blair, it's not just that I disagreed with the government on the policy, I'm ashamed of what the government did in the name of our country.
QUESTIONER_10: I do actually agree with you, but what if the UN want people in there?
QUESTIONER_10: What are you going to do then?
QUESTIONER_10: Are you going to refuse with the UN?
KENNEDY: No, not necessarily so.
KENNEDY: If there's an international consensus which involves the United Nations, then of course that changes the whole picture at the moment.
KENNEDY: But at the moment, the UN mandate for those occupying forces expires at the end of this year.
KENNEDY: Now, nobody knows at this stage whether it will be renewed or extended.
KENNEDY: Yes, but what if they want peacekeepers in?
KENNEDY: We can't answer that.
KENNEDY: Therefore, we should be working responsibly to bring our forces home.
QUESTIONER_10: I'm talking about peacekeepers, it's a different thing.
KENNEDY: That's different completely.
KENNEDY: We've always said that actually, instead of having the flag of the United States flying in so much of Iraq, have the flag of the United Nations and have forces particularly drawn from other countries, other than our own and the United States, Muslim forces in particular, from other countries in Iraq.
QUESTIONER_0: But not British even wearing blue helmets?
KENNEDY: British by all means wearing blue helmets.
KENNEDY: That's a very different commitment.
QUESTIONER_0: The man up there and then I'll come to you.
QUESTIONER_11: If you win the election and George Bush says to you, let's go to war again without the authority of the UN, you will definitely say no?
KENNEDY: Correct.
KENNEDY: And I've said that to George.
KENNEDY: and what's more President Bush knows that because when I met him in London during a state visit a year and a half ago we had this very discussion and I confirmed that was a view and interestingly although we disagreed
KENNEDY: Rather revealingly, he remarked to me during that discussion that he'd enjoyed it, although he didn't see eye to eye on Iraq, because, as he put it, you're one of the few guys I'm meeting on this visit that actually doesn't agree with me.
KENNEDY: He was only allowed to meet people that were singing from his hymn sheet.
KENNEDY: OK. You, sir.
QUESTIONER_12: As Mr Kennedy frequently says, the Liberal Democrats were the only party to take a stance against the war, which I was an advocate of.
QUESTIONER_12: Do you feel that you've made enough political capital out of that view?
QUESTIONER_12: Because when I look at the opinion polls, I quite frankly don't see them changing.
QUESTIONER_12: I don't see that it's made an impact.
QUESTIONER_12: I don't see that the public have realised that the Liberal Democrats were on the majority of the public side, yet they don't seem to be voting for you.
QUESTIONER_12: Do you think that reflects, to a certain extent, the lack of charisma and dynamism you show as a leader?
KENNEDY: Well, I think that if you look at the level of support... That's all right.
KENNEDY: You're being much more generous than Michael Howard is about Tony Blair.
KENNEDY: That's not an insult at all, I can assure you.
KENNEDY: I think, first of all, if you look at the level of support for the Liberal Democrats, it was a distinctive position.
KENNEDY: It was taken on principle.
KENNEDY: and people forget two years on, it was actually quite courageous because popular opinion at that point amongst commentators, political opponents, I was being called Charlie Chamberlain in the House of Commons by Conservatives, betraying a distinct lack of knowledge of history of their own party, incidentally.
KENNEDY: But we took the stand.
KENNEDY: Labour support has gone down over Iraq.
KENNEDY: That support is transferred to us.
KENNEDY: And in this campaign, sir,
KENNEDY: We went in at our highest ever level for an election campaign that we've ever fought as a party.
KENNEDY: And as we speak tonight, we're at a higher level than we've ever achieved.
KENNEDY: And we're moving up.
QUESTIONER_12: that you have any opportunity, no matter what anyone claims, that you'll be the real alternative or even, in fact, the national opposition.
QUESTIONER_12: It's just absolute rubbish.
KENNEDY: With a week to go, let's see what's going to happen.
KENNEDY: The one thing people have concluded so far in the campaign is the Conservatives can't win this election.
KENNEDY: They don't like the idea of Tony Blair back with another three-figure majority.
KENNEDY: Therefore, what are they going to make their minds up over these next few days?
KENNEDY: Increasingly, they are looking at us, and it's up to us to make the case.
QUESTIONER_0: The man there.
QUESTIONER_13: If there was a hung Parliament and you were offered a coalition... We'll come to that later on, I think.
QUESTIONER_13: It's about this issue.
QUESTIONER_0: Can we just hold it?
QUESTIONER_0: We've got a question about that and I don't want him to go off on that at the moment.
QUESTIONER_0: You, madam, over there, and then we'll move on.
QUESTIONER_0: Yes.
QUESTIONER_14: You mentioned Mr. Bush, and given that you differ on a number of issues with him, you have different views on a number of key issues.
QUESTIONER_14: So how would that impact relations between Britain and the U.S. if you were to be
KENNEDY: I don't think that is... Whatever the outcome of our election here, it would be no different from when President Bush defeated Vice President Gore, and you went from a Democrat administration that Prime Minister Blair was very close to, to a Republican one, which at that point we all thought he'd be much further away from.
KENNEDY: How wrong you can be in your historical judgements.
KENNEDY: But no, I think we respect our democratic traditions on both sides of the Atlantic.
KENNEDY: And remember, this is not about anti-Americanism on our part.
KENNEDY: I had one of the happiest years of my life as a student in the United States.
KENNEDY: This is about disagreement with an American administration, which, remember, half the citizens of America don't agree with either.
KENNEDY: All right?
KENNEDY: Lauren Cox, please.
KENNEDY: Question from Lauren Cox.
QUESTIONER_15: what's your views on claims that your policies of free long-term health care for the elderly and abolishing tuition fees are pandering to the middle classes?
KENNEDY: Well, my view about this is that if you're running a fair society in this country, and if you are taxing that very small percentage at the wealthiest end that bit more, the way in which we achieve a sense that we're in it together in this country, whatever our income or backgrounds or aspirations, is that you spread the benefits right across the board.
KENNEDY: somebody kindly mentioned about us becoming a family within the last couple of weeks.
KENNEDY: Now my wife and myself are lucky in the sense that academically we got the opportunity to go to university and we got degrees and that's helped both our lives and careers subsequently.
KENNEDY: But that same night in that same hospital
KENNEDY: There were people without, perhaps, university degrees, perhaps not aspiring ever from their backgrounds to have had that opportunity, but they benefit, just as we did, from the clinicians, the consultants, the doctors that, as a society, we've invested in to give that knowledge and that skill base.
QUESTIONER_0: But isn't Lauren Cox's point that these things are, at present, means-tested, and by making them a universal benefit, you're helping people who can actually afford to pay something towards them.
QUESTIONER_0: They suddenly won't have to.
QUESTIONER_0: Is that your point, Lauren?
QUESTIONER_15: partly.
QUESTIONER_15: It depends on whether you think that both of those aims could actually be achieved solely by the 50% tax.
KENNEDY: The figures add up.
KENNEDY: Tony Blair might disagree with me as he does regularly in the House of Commons about the policy and he is doing something different.
KENNEDY: What cannot be denied is that the money that comes in
KENNEDY: more than makes up the money that would go out for those policies.
KENNEDY: Now, I think it's fairer to treat society on an equal basis, because if we go down the other route, as we are at the moment with pensions, say, more and more means testing, more complexity, more pensioners in genuine need who don't actually get the support that is there for them.
KENNEDY: Or, worse still, you have an increasingly divided society, where those of us who are that bit better off can increasingly opt towards private provision, and those who are less well off are dependent on a shrinking quality of state support.
KENNEDY: Now, that is not in any of our long-term interests.
QUESTIONER_0: But you said in Scotland you were going to abolish these fees, didn't you?
QUESTIONER_0: Yes.
KENNEDY: What happened?
KENNEDY: Well, we abolished the fees.
KENNEDY: You don't pay for tuition in Scotland.
KENNEDY: And what happens now?
KENNEDY: And what happens now is that the rate of application from Scots...
KENNEDY: Hang on, hang on.
KENNEDY: What happens financially now?
QUESTIONER_0: Oh, I see.
QUESTIONER_0: Well, what happens... Everybody pays... No.
QUESTIONER_0: ..£2,000.
KENNEDY: You only pay... Graduate tax.
KENNEDY: It's not a graduate tax, and let me explain why.
KENNEDY: Let me be quite clear about this.
KENNEDY: Once your income, beyond graduation, goes above a certain level,
KENNEDY: you have a £2,000 which kicks in to pay, not for the tuition you received, but it sets up an endowment fund of new money.
KENNEDY: What's the difference between that and top-up fees or tuition fees?
KENNEDY: I'll tell you what the difference is.
KENNEDY: From the point of view of the person who's paying it?
KENNEDY: If you allow me to answer the question, David, I'll tell you exactly what the difference is.
KENNEDY: The difference is this.
KENNEDY: The money doesn't go to the Scottish universities for their tuition costs.
KENNEDY: It goes to an endowment fund which enables students or potential students from poorer Scottish backgrounds to get the chance to go to university in the first place.
KENNEDY: I think that's a reasonable payback.
QUESTIONER_0: Sorry, let's just get this straight.
QUESTIONER_0: The very poorest still now pay £2,000, whereas before means-tested they'd have paid nothing.
KENNEDY: Is that true or not?
KENNEDY: No, it's not true.
KENNEDY: What we're saying is that if you get your degree, you graduate, you go into the labour market, once you're above a certain level of income, you have a £2,000 contribution to make.
KENNEDY: over phased installments.
KENNEDY: That money sets up an endowment fund, it doesn't go to the universities, and it goes to widen the net of poorer students who can come in as the next generation of students.
KENNEDY: Now I think that's good.
KENNEDY: And can I come back to what the lady who asked me the question was pointing out about this?
KENNEDY: What has been the implication?
KENNEDY: The implication in Scotland, the subsequent events have shown,
KENNEDY: that the rate of increase of application for Scots wanting to go to Scottish universities is now significantly higher than it is in England and Wales for English and Welsh students wanting to go to English and Welsh universities.
KENNEDY: And you can't tell me that isn't because people look at the appalling prospect of £12,000, £20,000 worth of debt and say, I can't afford it, my family can't afford it.
KENNEDY: That's terrible.
QUESTIONER_0: That's absolutely terrible.
QUESTIONER_0: Let's move on.
QUESTIONER_0: Christian, Christian Sanderson, please.
QUESTIONER_16: If there were to be a hung Parliament next week, would the Liberal Democrats be prepared to go into a coalition with Labour?
QUESTIONER_16: No.
QUESTIONER_16: And would they support Tony Blair?
QUESTIONER_16: No.
QUESTIONER_16: OK, you've answered my question.
QUESTIONER_0: No.
QUESTIONER_0: Hang on.
QUESTIONER_0: No, there are two questions.
QUESTIONER_0: The first question was, would you go into a coalition?
QUESTIONER_0: The second part was...
QUESTIONER_16: In that coalition, would they support Tony Blair as Prime Minister?
QUESTIONER_16: But it's answered by the first one.
QUESTIONER_16: It is, yes.
QUESTIONER_0: Yeah, all right, well, let me put a supplementary.
QUESTIONER_0: All right.
QUESTIONER_0: You don't go into...
QUESTIONER_16: I know you love this.
QUESTIONER_0: You don't go...
KENNEDY: I love this issue.
QUESTIONER_0: You don't go into a coalition.
KENNEDY: Correct.
KENNEDY: Would you support Tony Blair?
KENNEDY: No, I mean, we wouldn't support Tony Blair.
KENNEDY: If you have a Parliament where there's no overall majority next time, a government's got to be formed.
KENNEDY: Now, let's not speculate which party's the biggest single party but without a majority.
KENNEDY: But that party, which has the first opportunity to form a government, is going to have to conduct itself in Parliament by taking account of opposition parties' viewpoints, also dissenting voices in its own party.
KENNEDY: Now, I think that's a much healthier way to proceed.
KENNEDY: than what we've had over the last four years in particular, which is a government with a big majority riding roughshod, not just over opposition opinions, but over the substantial opinions of its own members of Parliament, which is why you get student fees when they said they wouldn't, which is why you get a war in Iraq, which is why they say they're not putting up tax, and then they turn around and increase national insurance.
KENNEDY: No wonder, heavens almighty, people are so cynical about politics in this country.
KENNEDY: If politicians had to listen a bit more, it would be better.
KENNEDY: Yes.
QUESTIONER_17: So if they had a different leader, would the answer still be no?
KENNEDY: The answer would still be no, because the six years I've been leader of the Liberal Democrats, I'm, the last time I counted, on my third leader of the Conservative Party, and I don't base my political activity by who happens to be leader of the Tory Party, and I'm certainly not going to base my future activity by who may or may not be leader of the Labour Party.
KENNEDY: I'm confident about myself and about the Liberal Democrats, and the other two can look after themselves.
QUESTIONER_0: Who would you prefer to have as Prime Minister?
KENNEDY: Charles Kennedy.
QUESTIONER_0: Apart from Charles Kennedy.
QUESTIONER_0: I looked at your map where you said if everybody who was thinking of voting Liberal Democrat voted, this is what the picture of the country would look like.
QUESTIONER_0: It was 100 short of a majority, so even you don't believe you're going to form the next government, you don't believe you're going to be Prime
QUESTIONER_0: You don't believe you're going to be the biggest party?
KENNEDY: What we absolutely acknowledge is that the one thing you've got in British politics is no party, Labour, Conservative or Liberal Democrat, under whatever voting system, can say we speak for the majority.
KENNEDY: None of us do.
KENNEDY: We are competing minorities.
KENNEDY: And we've got a very perverse voting system, which I think is going to throw up a very unpredictable election result.
KENNEDY: So who emerges as the biggest is anybody's guess right now.
KENNEDY: OK, you, sir.
QUESTIONER_18: If Gordon Brown takes over midterm, would you consider a coalition party?
KENNEDY: No, because I don't think that if you are in the serious business of politics, and whether you agree with me or not in this room or watching this programme,
KENNEDY: What you do want from your politicians, I think, is a consistency of principle and values.
KENNEDY: And you can't, by definition in my view, be consistent and principled about your values and your approach if you're willing to shuffle around with them.
KENNEDY: What do you do in Scotland?
KENNEDY: In Scotland, the difference is you have a voting system which recognises that in Scotland... Why not jump out of the voting system in Westminster and start doing exactly what you do in Scotland, negotiating, make conditions, do deals, why not?
QUESTIONER_0: What purpose is the Liberal Democrat Party if you don't do that?
KENNEDY: if you're in a hung Parliament?
KENNEDY: Well, I'll try and answer if you stop asking so many questions.
KENNEDY: The issue is this in Scotland, you have a voting system which does reflect the minority nature of each of the parties and that means there's an obligation on the parties after an election to cooperate.
KENNEDY: There is no such obligation at Westminster because we've got a thoroughly perverse, unjust voting system.
KENNEDY: One more brief point from you.
QUESTIONER_19: I agree with you about the electoral system.
QUESTIONER_19: So if you did get into government, would you work to bring a proportional representation system in for Britain?
KENNEDY: You bet I would.
KENNEDY: And you bet I would.
KENNEDY: Not just because if we were in a position to do that on our own, we'd have won under the existing system.
KENNEDY: but that doesn't justify the existing system.
KENNEDY: So you would do a deal on that?
KENNEDY: No.
KENNEDY: We would put forward...
KENNEDY: I hope that all politicians would recognise something.
KENNEDY: There's one thing that's a bit more important than the self-interest of our parties, and it is the equal value, whatever constituency, whatever political persuasion they may be,
KENNEDY: of voters where their vote is concerned.
KENNEDY: At the moment, too many people's votes are corrupted by having to vote tactically.
KENNEDY: I want people at this election, and I believe they are, going to go out there and vote for values and principles and a bit of hope in our country.
QUESTIONER_20: Charles Kennedy, thank you very much indeed.
QUESTIONER_20: Thank you.
QUESTIONER_20: Pleasure.
QUESTIONER_20: Thank you very much.
QUESTIONER_20: Thank you.
QUESTIONER_0: All right.
QUESTIONER_0: All right.
QUESTIONER_0: Now we hear from the man who took over the leadership of the Conservative Party from Iain Duncan Smith just 18 months ago, Michael Howard.
QUESTIONER_0: Mr Howard, your first question comes from Gary Horsman, please.
QUESTIONER_21: If your family were still in the country of their origin, would you let them into the UK?
HOWARD: I would do what I do on every question that faces me.
HOWARD: I would do what's best for Britain.
HOWARD: Now what I think is best for Britain is that we have a system of immigration control which works, which is fair.
HOWARD: and which has limits on it.
HOWARD: I think that you need those limits.
HOWARD: Immigration has increased three times since Mr Blair came to office without anybody being consulted or asked about it.
HOWARD: Now, my father came to this country as an economic migrant.
HOWARD: He came to do a job.
HOWARD: and we would make provision within our limits for people whose skills were needed in this country who come to do jobs.
HOWARD: And we'd do that after consulting with the employers' organisations to make sure that we get people with the necessary skills.
HOWARD: That's the right thing for Britain.
HOWARD: That's what I would do.
QUESTIONER_0: And it would depend on whether they'd reach the limit that you wanted, whether they got in or not?
QUESTIONER_0: Yes, it would.
QUESTIONER_0: So they might not get in?
QUESTIONER_0: That's possible.
QUESTIONER_0: Gary Horstman, does that answer your question?
QUESTIONER_0: We've got to do what's right for Britain.
QUESTIONER_0: Mr Horstman, does that answer your question?
QUESTIONER_21: I think the question wasn't necessarily designed to have an answer that I had an opinion about, it's really just opening up the debate.
QUESTIONER_21: The reason why I asked the question in the first place is because I think there's a lot of posturing about it.
QUESTIONER_21: It was very interesting the question time a few weeks ago when you added an independent journalist on here, who gave a whole different set of statistics and opinions about what's going on with the immigration debate.
QUESTIONER_21: I don't think we really get that kind of real debate about immigration going on.
QUESTIONER_22: I think there's a lot of posturing going on.
QUESTIONER_0: OK, the man there, can I ask a question?
QUESTIONER_22: What you're really saying is that the only way in which you would let people into this country is on whether they're good for this country.
QUESTIONER_22: What about those people who'd be murdered if they went back home?
QUESTIONER_22: The people who'd be tortured if they went back?
QUESTIONER_22: that the people of Scotland say, and I've read the Scotsman three times on this subject, that they'd like some of those immigrants up there and this government isn't sending them up there.
QUESTIONER_22: You aren't even talking about filling that gap.
HOWARD: Well, I was in Scotland yesterday actually talking about precisely that, but let me answer your question because it's not the case.
HOWARD: What did you say to them?
HOWARD: That I would...
HOWARD: I said...
HOWARD: In Scotland, that is.
HOWARD: Right, I said I'd deal with Scotland, but I must deal with the other point as well.
QUESTIONER_0: Well, you just said you were up in Scotland and you were talking to them.
HOWARD: Sure, I was.
HOWARD: And what I said was that when, first of all, when we have our point system to decide who comes into the country with the skills that we need, we would give extra points for people who want to go to Scotland if their skills are needed in Scotland.
HOWARD: The problem Scotland faces is that a lot of their young people are leaving Scotland.
HOWARD: with unlimited immigration, uncontrolled immigration.
HOWARD: The reason they are leaving Scotland is because the Scottish economy is doing much less well than the economy of the rest of the country, the rest of the United Kingdom.
HOWARD: David, please let me answer the first question the gentleman posed because it is a very important one.
HOWARD: We have never said
HOWARD: that the only people we'd let in would be people with the skills that are needed in this country.
HOWARD: That's not the policy.
HOWARD: There would be three groups of people we'd let in.
HOWARD: The first are those people whose skills we need, the second are those people who want to come into the country for family reunion, and the third are refugees, genuine refugees,
HOWARD: We'd have more genuine refugees come into the country than come in now.
HOWARD: The problem now is that we have a very unfair, inhumane system which rewards those people who pay the people smugglers who traffic people across the world.
HOWARD: And I want to put an end to that.
QUESTIONER_6: Do you think if your quota had been reached it would be good for Britain if valuable doctors and nurses were not allowed into the country?
HOWARD: Well, I believe that our limit for those with the skills that we need would include proper provision for doctors and nurses who we need to come into the country.
HOWARD: But let me say something else about that.
HOWARD: We have a problem at the moment.
HOWARD: We have a problem because
HOWARD: Vast numbers of nurses working in the health service at the moment are leaving because they're fed up with the system we have at the moment.
HOWARD: And that's why we have to bring in nurses from abroad, often from countries which need those nurses, to stay there and nurse people in those countries.
HOWARD: I'd far rather we kept nurses in our health service by having a system that helps them rather than hinders them, so they didn't leave the health service in the considerable numbers that they're doing today.
HOWARD: All right.
HOWARD: And the woman at the very back there.
QUESTIONER_8: If you're talking about limits on immigration, would you pull out of the Geneva Convention?
HOWARD: Yes, because I think it's out of date, and indeed Mr Blair agrees with me on that.
HOWARD: He said it's out of date.
HOWARD: It was entered into more than 50 years ago.
HOWARD: It doesn't reflect the needs of today's world, and the difference between me and Mr Blair is that he talks about it, but I would actually do it.
HOWARD: I think it's out of date.
HOWARD: I don't think it reflects the modern world, and yes, we would pull out of it.
HOWARD: Gary Horsman, do you want to come back in on this?
HOWARD: Oh, you want to come back on it?
QUESTIONER_8: Sorry, yes, go on.
QUESTIONER_8: So, would you want it replaced with something else, or do you think it's just up to individual states?
HOWARD: Well, I think if we could get a sensible international agreement, that would be a very good thing.
HOWARD: I tried... You know, when I was Home Secretary, I tried to get international agreement at the United Nations that you shouldn't allow someone who is a terrorist to go through the whole panoply of appeals and procedures that you have to allow them to go through today.
HOWARD: And I failed to get agreement even on that.
HOWARD: So I'd like to get a new international agreement.
HOWARD: I'm not terribly optimistic that it would be easy to get.
QUESTIONER_23: how can you actually justify pulling out of the 1951 Refugee Convention?
QUESTIONER_23: I can understand saying that you want to amend it to perhaps consider things like internally displaced people, but to actually say you want to pull out of the Refugee Convention, which more than 140 states signed up to it, not a single country has actually pulled out of the Refugee Convention.
QUESTIONER_23: You want to make Britain be the first country to pull out of it.
QUESTIONER_23: And secondly, I mean, your policies just sound to be very anti-human rights, just like the same way you want to scrap the Human Rights Act as well, for no good reason at all.
HOWARD: Let me deal with both those questions.
HOWARD: First of all, yes, I think it's out of date and that's why I want to pull out of it.
HOWARD: But I emphasise we would take genuine refugees, more genuine refugees than come into this country today.
HOWARD: I think we have a duty to do that.
HOWARD: I want this country to continue to give sanctuary, but not to the people who pay the people traffickers.
HOWARD: I want to give sanctuary to the mothers and the children who can't afford to pay the people smugglers,
HOWARD: who aren't strong enough to be transported in the backs of lorries halfway across the world.
HOWARD: That's what I want to do.
HOWARD: I want a much fairer and more humane system than we have today.
HOWARD: OK, let's have a question from Lucy Elliott.
QUESTIONER_0: Lucy Elliott, please.
QUESTIONER_24: Calling people liars and raising potentially damaging issues over immigration, do you worry about the effect your negative campaign is having on our society?
HOWARD: Lucy, we have put forward...
HOWARD: We've put forward from the beginning of this campaign the things we want to do for our country.
HOWARD: Our five commitments are cleaner hospitals, school discipline, more police, controlled immigration, lower taxes.
HOWARD: Let me tell you a little bit about the importance of school discipline.
HOWARD: School discipline is crucial.
HOWARD: I went to a terrific school this afternoon.
HOWARD: It was a joy to behold.
HOWARD: And there are some many tremendous schools in our country.
HOWARD: But there are many where children just are having their education wrecked because of the activities of one or two disruptive children in the class who spoil the opportunity for others to learn.
HOWARD: So we have to do something about that.
HOWARD: And what we do is give headteachers the right to exclude.
HOWARD: So we've been putting forward our plans.
HOWARD: It's a choice at this election.
HOWARD: It's a choice between parties with different programmes.
HOWARD: And one of the things that people have to take into account when they decide is not only the programmes that the parties are putting forward, but whether those parties are likely to deliver on their promises.
HOWARD: and if you have a situation in which, as is the case with Mr Blair, that before 1997, he said there'd be no need to increase taxes, and he did immediately afterwards, and he did the same thing before the last election, and he promised, he said he was opposed to...
HOWARD: I'm not sure you're answering Lucy Allitt's point.
HOWARD: I think I am, Liz.
QUESTIONER_0: Because you're talking about Mr Blair, and we're here... We're here... We're here...
QUESTIONER_0: We're here to listen to you talk about your policies, and I want to go back to Lucy Elliott and just ask you what it was you were thinking of, and whether Mr Howard is answering your point.
QUESTIONER_24: Yeah, I think that the campaign from the Tories seems to be terribly negative, and I keep hearing about liars, and I've had children who are now talking about Tony Blair being a liar, which I don't think is healthy.
QUESTIONER_24: You're talking about schools.
QUESTIONER_24: I don't want children to think that, as adults, we can go around accusing people
QUESTIONER_24: of being liars.
HOWARD: Well, let's see.
HOWARD: How many people in this audience think that Mr Blair told the truth about the war?
HOWARD: Put up your hands.
HOWARD: There aren't very many, so it doesn't look as though I'm alone.
HOWARD: And the important thing is that if you are to make an assessment...
QUESTIONER_0: The word liar was what it was about, Mr Howard, not about whether people thought people were telling the truth.
QUESTIONER_0: It's the use of the word liar, I think, isn't it, that you're objecting to.
QUESTIONER_0: That's the objection.
HOWARD: Well, I'm afraid I tell it like it is.
HOWARD: And I tell it as I see it, I'm afraid.
HOWARD: What you see is what you get, I'm afraid.
HOWARD: I'm going to be perfectly honest and straight.
HOWARD: I'm very direct.
HOWARD: And I think that it's important that people are able to take into account in deciding whether someone's going to keep their promises and deliver on their programs the extent to which they've done so in the past or the extent to which they've misled people in the past.
QUESTIONER_0: Is George W. Bush a liar as well as Tony Blair?
HOWARD: No, he justified the war on Iraq on an entirely different basis.
QUESTIONER_25: Michael Howard.
QUESTIONER_25: I know you hate me because I'm an asylum seeker, yeah?
QUESTIONER_25: No, I don't.
QUESTIONER_25: No, of course you do.
QUESTIONER_25: No.
QUESTIONER_25: And the language you use towards asylum seekers are insane, I tell you.
QUESTIONER_25: You don't know what it feels like, yeah?
QUESTIONER_25: What you're saying towards asylum seekers, you're treating them as dirt.
QUESTIONER_25: Racism is not even a word for it.
QUESTIONER_25: You see them as dirt, as filthy, like Hitler.
QUESTIONER_25: You should see you and your parents 60 years ago, all right, before you came into this country, and I'll tell you that.
HOWARD: Well, I'm afraid I completely disagree with you.
HOWARD: I want...
HOWARD: I want...
HOWARD: I don't know how you came to the country or where you come from.
HOWARD: You don't know what it feels like.
QUESTIONER_25: But I want to give... You can't talk about a human being like that, because you're an asylum seeker yourself, and you're your parents, do you know what I mean?
HOWARD: No, that's not actually true.
HOWARD: But I want more genuine refugees in this country than come today.
QUESTIONER_25: I tell you how we do it.
HOWARD: We would take people from the United Nations.
HOWARD: There are people all over the world.
HOWARD: Mothers and children.
HOWARD: who desperately need sanctuary.
HOWARD: They are the people we should be giving sanctuary to, not people, I don't know how you came here, I don't know your circumstances, but the truth is...
QUESTIONER_25: I think you have been very evil.
QUESTIONER_25: I am afraid the truth is...
QUESTIONER_25: I don't understand how the British government allows people for you to be in a government.
QUESTIONER_0: I'm afraid the truth is... No, I want to go on to somebody else.
QUESTIONER_0: The man at the back there in the white shirt.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you.
QUESTIONER_26: Mr Howard, is the Labour government putting pupils and students under too much pressure these days?
QUESTIONER_26: In the last at least seven years, I must have taken at least 60, 70 written exams.
QUESTIONER_26: That is too much.
QUESTIONER_27: Right.
QUESTIONER_0: It's an off-the-wall question, but if you'd like to answer it...
QUESTIONER_0: It's a very interesting one.
QUESTIONER_0: Yes, yes, but don't go on too long about it, if you don't mind, because we've got a long agenda here tonight.
HOWARD: Hang on, it's a very important one, because there's nothing more important than education.
HOWARD: And I think the answer to your question is almost certainly yes.
HOWARD: What we've said we would do is to set up a committee under Chris Woodhead to look at the curriculum, to see if the national curriculum can be slimmed down,
HOWARD: to look again at the kind of exams which people sit and the tests which they sit.
HOWARD: I think we've got to keep the exams, but we've got to make the exams more useful than they are today, more useful to the people who sit the exams and more useful to the employers who need to be guided by them too often.
HOWARD: They're a smokescreen.
HOWARD: Let's just go back to where we were.
QUESTIONER_26: Yeah, just reverting back to the liar.
QUESTIONER_26: In the polls at the moment, you're a bit behind Labour.
QUESTIONER_26: How does it feel to be less trusted than someone you've called a liar?
HOWARD: Different polls say different things about that, and as I often say, there's only one poll that matters, and it's the one that's going to take place a week today.
HOWARD: All right.
HOWARD: Anu, sir.
QUESTIONER_28: I think Michael Howard's absolutely right to call Tony Blair a liar.
QUESTIONER_28: He's had...
QUESTIONER_28: He's got...
QUESTIONER_28: He's got eight years of form of lying to the British people.
QUESTIONER_28: There's soldiers from my town who are dead because of his lies.
QUESTIONER_28: The only people in this country who believe Tony Blair are Mrs Blair and Alastair Campbell.
QUESTIONER_0: Let's move on.
QUESTIONER_0: A question from Ahmad Khwaja, please.
QUESTIONER_0: Ahmad Khwaja.
QUESTIONER_29: Thank you.
QUESTIONER_29: Mr. Howard, would you and the Conservative Party supported the Iraq war had you known then what you know now?
HOWARD: Now, the answer I'm about to give is probably one, Ahmed, that you won't agree with, and that a lot of other people won't agree with, but I have to say it as I see it, and though I have total respect for the views of those who disagree with me, my answer is this.
HOWARD: Yes, I would have supported the war,
HOWARD: because I think it was the right thing to do.
HOWARD: Saddam Hussein had been in breach of many United Nations resolutions.
HOWARD: I think he was a threat to the peace of the region and a threat to the wider peace in the world.
HOWARD: But I think that it was possible to go to war and to tell the truth.
HOWARD: And I don't think Mr Blair did that.
HOWARD: And I think it was possible to go to war and have a plan.
HOWARD: And we were saying at the time, where is your plan for what happens after Saddam Hussein has been deposed?
HOWARD: And if we'd had a plan, I think we could have avoided many of the mistakes that were made.
HOWARD: For example, the disbandment of the Iraqi army and the Iraqi police, which should have been kept in place under a different command.
HOWARD: And if that had been done, we could probably have avoided many of the difficulties which we still face today.
QUESTIONER_0: But Mr Howard, the question was, if you knew now what you didn't know then, would you have gone to war?
QUESTIONER_0: What you know now is there were no weapons of mass destruction.
QUESTIONER_0: Are you saying you would have still gone to war against Iraq if you'd known there were no WMD in Iraq?
HOWARD: Yes, that's exactly what I'm saying.
HOWARD: On what grounds?
HOWARD: On the grounds that I've just given, that Saddam Hussein was a threat to the peace of the region, was a threat to wider peace.
HOWARD: He had tried to get weapons of mass destruction in the past and used them.
HOWARD: He would have tried again, and he was in breach of several United Nations Security Council resolutions.
HOWARD: Now, that's not a view that will meet with universal approval or agreement, but it's as I see it.
HOWARD: Would it meet with the Attorney General's approval, do you think?
HOWARD: That you'll have to ask the Attorney General.
HOWARD: No, but you think.
HOWARD: You're a lawyer, you've been talking about this all day.
HOWARD: Yes, and the Attorney General recognises that there's... No WMD and you can still go to war against Saddam.
HOWARD: Yes, I think so.
HOWARD: The Attorney General recognises that there's more than one view and that's the view I take.
HOWARD: Isn't that a regime change war rather than anything to do with the United Nations?
HOWARD: Well, it's regime change plus because I also...
HOWARD: I also mentioned the breach of the United Nations Security Resolutions.
HOWARD: You have to take the whole thing into account.
HOWARD: Even if he's not a threat?
HOWARD: Well, I think he was a threat.
HOWARD: You can be a threat.
HOWARD: Well, no WMD.
QUESTIONER_0: But you can still be a threat.
QUESTIONER_0: I'll go back to the question.
QUESTIONER_29: But isn't regime change illegal under United Nations regulations?
QUESTIONER_29: Well, as I say... How many regimes are there in this world which we should change?
QUESTIONER_29: And we haven't.
HOWARD: Well, regime change on its own isn't enough.
HOWARD: You have to have other things as well.
HOWARD: And what you had in the case of Saddam Hussein was the breach of a number of United Nations Security Council resolutions.
HOWARD: And you had Security Council Resolution 1441.
HOWARD: Now, the interpretation of that is quite controversial.
HOWARD: But there is a perfectly respectable view that that did provide the basis for the action that was taken.
HOWARD: And that's my view.
HOWARD: Now, you're perfectly entitled to disagree with it.
HOWARD: But that's my view.
HOWARD: OK.
HOWARD: The man there with the black tie.
QUESTIONER_7: So you say you'd go to war with Iraq because he broke UN resolutions, but you'd go there without a UN mandate?
HOWARD: Yes.
HOWARD: Well, the argument is whether what was contained in Resolution 1441 was a sufficient UN mandate.
HOWARD: There was a UN mandate in that resolution.
HOWARD: Some people say it wasn't enough.
HOWARD: Others say it was enough.
HOWARD: That's the argument.
QUESTIONER_0: Okay, man down here.
QUESTIONER_30: I think what I find amazing sitting here is that Tony Blair clearly made a mistake going to Iraq and you actually start sitting there saying that you would do the same thing.
HOWARD: Look, it would be politically much more convenient for me to say that I think it was a terrible mistake and I wouldn't have done it.
HOWARD: But I'm afraid I've got to be straight about it.
HOWARD: Even though it is politically inconvenient, I've got to tell you the truth as I see it.
HOWARD: And the truth as I see it is that it was the right thing to do.
QUESTIONER_0: And you would have gone, just to get this absolutely clear, you would have gone, if you'd known all the intelligence that was there and all the things that were discovered subsequently, without any WMD, without any immediate apparent threat, simply on the grounds that he hadn't abided by 1441, by the resolution, regardless of whether there was a real genuine threat to this country
HOWARD: or the world at large?
HOWARD: No, no, no.
HOWARD: I've said it was more than one thing.
HOWARD: It was a combination of the fact that...
QUESTIONER_0: But it can't be regime change, because Goldsmith has said it can't be, under law.
HOWARD: Not just regime change, but... Not at all regime change.
HOWARD: No, look, David, what I'm saying is...
QUESTIONER_0: Sorry, what he actually says is regime change cannot be the objective of military action in the thing that was at least released this morning.
HOWARD: What I'm saying is that I think he was a threat to the peace of the region, a threat to the wider peace, and he was in breach of United Nations Security Council resolutions.
HOWARD: That's my view, and others may disagree.
HOWARD: The man there.
HOWARD: I'll come to you next.
QUESTIONER_31: You clearly supported Tony Blair in regime change in Iraq, but would you support it to dispose of another evil dictator such as Robert Mugabe in Zimbabwe?
QUESTIONER_31: Millions of people die, he might not have weapons of mass destruction, but he's surely just as evil.
HOWARD: I would love to be able to get rid of the regime of Robert Mugabe, which I think is one of the most despicable tyrannies on the face of this earth.
HOWARD: I would love to be able to do it.
HOWARD: But I think it's however awful and despicable that regime is, it's very difficult to argue that it's a threat to the peace outside Zimbabwe.
HOWARD: And you can't, as someone else pointed out earlier, I think it was Ahmed suggested earlier, what you can't do is go around the world changing every regime that you think is a bad regime.
HOWARD: There are many bad regimes in the world.
HOWARD: And I think we should do much more than we're doing now to change them.
HOWARD: I think we should be doing much more than we're doing now to try and get rid of Robert Mugabe.
HOWARD: But hang on.
HOWARD: I think we should have sanctions against Robert Mugabe which are properly enforced.
QUESTIONER_0: You could go on the basis that it's a humanitarian catastrophe.
QUESTIONER_0: You could go on the basis of a humanitarian catastrophe, couldn't you?
QUESTIONER_0: Well, I think that's...
QUESTIONER_0: Under the UN.
QUESTIONER_0: I mean, if you want to argue the UN case, if you want to argue the UN case, that's...
HOWARD: I think it would be difficult to do that in relation to Zimbabwe.
HOWARD: More is the pity.
HOWARD: More is the pity.
QUESTIONER_0: You don't want to go?
QUESTIONER_0: OK, right.
QUESTIONER_0: And you, sir, yes, and then we'll move on.
QUESTIONER_13: If you were in power, would you maintain a nuclear deterrent and would you use it on someone who wanted to change our regime?
HOWARD: I would maintain a nuclear deterrent.
HOWARD: The whole point of the nuclear deterrent is that it is a deterrent, and it's worked as a deterrent for a very long time, and I think it would continue to work as a deterrent for a long time into the future.
HOWARD: But as more countries, unfortunately, seem to be on the point of acquiring weapons of mass destruction, I think we need to be able to deter them from attacking us.
HOWARD: All right.
QUESTIONER_0: Let's move on to a question from Alan Revel, please.
QUESTIONER_0: Alan Revel?
QUESTIONER_0: Yes.
QUESTIONER_22: If there is a moral case for low taxation, why are you proposing such small reductions in tax?
HOWARD: Because I'm a practical man.
HOWARD: and because I want to do what I believe is right for the country.
HOWARD: Now, I think that we have to spend quite a lot of money in future on some of the important things, particularly hospitals and schools, because we are the fourth richest country in the world and it's about time we had a standard of education and a standard of healthcare that matched that fact.
HOWARD: Now, in order to do that, I think we need to change the system.
HOWARD: I think we need to trust doctors and nurses and trust teachers and not have all these targets, not have the command and control system that we have now in health and education, and we'd make changes to get real value for the taxpayers' money, but the money's needed as well.
HOWARD: So we've put forward our plans, we've said, where we would identify the waste and cut it out, and the choice between
HOWARD: for the country next week is this.
HOWARD: £4 billion of tax cuts from the Conservatives, £10 or £11 billion of tax increases from Labour, which every independent expert said they'd need.
HOWARD: That's a difference of about £1,000 for a typical family in the country, so it's a pretty sizeable amount.
QUESTIONER_0: Would, a simple question, if you're returned as a government and you're Prime Minister, would your government increase
QUESTIONER_0: the percentage of the nation's wealth created each year that's taken in tax, leave it the same or reduce it?
QUESTIONER_0: You're talking about the tax burden?
QUESTIONER_0: I'm talking about the amount of money the government receives from all of us here in tax.
HOWARD: As a proportion of income?
HOWARD: Yes.
HOWARD: Of national income?
QUESTIONER_0: Yes.
HOWARD: It would go up.
HOWARD: It would go up, so taxes would go up under the Tories.
HOWARD: No, we'd cut taxes.
HOWARD: The tax rates wouldn't go up.
HOWARD: But we'd be paying more money.
HOWARD: What's the difference?
HOWARD: Well, what always happens, you know this perfectly well, David, what always happens as an economy grows is that with the same tax rates, the proportion of national income that's taken in tax goes up.
HOWARD: It would go up much less with a Conservative government than it would with a Labour government.
HOWARD: and we would cut taxes, cut taxes across the range in our first budget, cut taxes for people trying to get a foot on the housing ladder by raising the stamp duty threshold to a quarter of a million pounds, help people who want to save for their pensions by giving them an extra £10 of tax relief for every £100 they put in their pension fund, and cut taxes for pensioners by giving them a 50% discount on their council tax bill
HOWARD: for every household where every adult is over 65, up to a limit of 500 pounds.
HOWARD: So every age range in the population would be helped by what we are proposing in tax cuts in our first budget.
QUESTIONER_0: Do you have an ideal figure of what you think the tax take should be for a Western economy in the beginning of the 21st century?
QUESTIONER_0: Do you have a target, since you make a moral issue about tax?
HOWARD: No, I don't have a particular figure in mind.
HOWARD: We do say that it would be lower, it would be 40% under a Conservative government after a period of time as compared to 42% under Labour.
HOWARD: and you've always got to balance the need for proper public services with the need for a low-tax economy which will encourage people to use their hard work, their skills, their energy, their enterprise to the full.
HOWARD: And it's a balanced judgment that you have to make at each budget every year.
HOWARD: Okay.
QUESTIONER_0: As long as you promise not to talk about bullying again, you can have just one quick comment.
QUESTIONER_0: Bullying is very important.
QUESTIONER_0: No, no, no, but he's already asked this question before.
QUESTIONER_5: Well, it'd give you continuity throughout the show.
QUESTIONER_5: No, no, I don't want that.
QUESTIONER_5: All right.
QUESTIONER_5: You're talking about taxes and you've talked about education and discipline in schools.
QUESTIONER_5: Would you ring-fence some of the money you raise through taxes to make sure that bullying is actually...
QUESTIONER_5: Sorry about that.
QUESTIONER_5: ..is actually dealt with so that we've got funding in there so that 15 to 20 children every year aren't committing suicide in our school system because there is nothing there for them that's compulsory and that's standardised?
QUESTIONER_0: Sorry about that.
HOWARD: Good.
QUESTIONER_0: OK, no apologies.
HOWARD: It is a very, very important question and bullying in our schools is a hugely important problem.
HOWARD: It's a part of the discipline problem which I was talking about earlier.
HOWARD: And we have to tackle this if our children are to get the decent chance in life that they need.
HOWARD: I'm very lucky.
HOWARD: I come from an ordinary family but I went to a school
HOWARD: a good state school, and I've benefited enormously from that.
HOWARD: And I want every child in this country to have the same kind of chance that I had.
HOWARD: So, to come directly to your question, if you give...
HOWARD: I'm not sure that you need to ring-fence the money.
HOWARD: If you give the head teachers the power to enforce discipline, what happens at the moment is if a head wants to exclude someone from school, someone who's been guilty of bullying, for example,
HOWARD: That headteacher can be second-guessed by a panel who take the appeal.
HOWARD: They may know little about the school.
HOWARD: They will know nothing about the child.
HOWARD: And if they override the headteacher...
HOWARD: The Tory idea, that, wasn't it?
HOWARD: They undermine the headteachers.
HOWARD: The Tory idea.
HOWARD: And we learn from our mistakes.
HOWARD: All right, good.
QUESTIONER_0: We learn from our mistakes.
QUESTIONER_0: That's the point.
QUESTIONER_0: And you... Just a note, very briefly now, and then we'll move on.
QUESTIONER_0: Yes.
QUESTIONER_0: Just quickly, if you would.
QUESTIONER_32: Thank you.
QUESTIONER_32: The current government refuses to implement the Royal Commission on long-term care because it says the country can't afford it.
QUESTIONER_32: Now, you're proposing tax cuts.
QUESTIONER_32: Does that mean to say that the Conservative Party won't implement the recommendations either, even bearing in mind that recently the Commons Select Committee on Healthcare said that it should be implemented?
HOWARD: Right, well it's a very serious problem and one of the worries which older people have is that they will have to sell their home in order to pay for the costs of long-term care.
QUESTIONER_32: That's not the thing I'm talking about.
QUESTIONER_32: I'm talking about the fact that when people receive care from social services in their homes or in residential care or in nursing homes, they have to pay for the personal care, being helped to wash and dress and go to the toilet.
QUESTIONER_32: That's got nothing to do with having to sell your house to pay for a place.
HOWARD: OK, well, I misunderstood the question, and you're quite right.
HOWARD: There is...
HOWARD: I think there are questions to be asked.
HOWARD: This is about the dividing line between nursing care and personal care, because nursing care is free and personal care isn't.
HOWARD: And I think there are real questions to be asked about the dividing line between the two, and we would look again at the dividing line between the two.
QUESTIONER_0: OK, let me take a quick question from Kirsty MacIver, please.
QUESTIONER_0: Kirsty MacIver.
QUESTIONER_19: This is the idea that you'll pay towards people who go into private healthcare.
QUESTIONER_0: What do you see?
HOWARD: There are lots of people who go for private healthcare at the moment who can't afford it.
HOWARD: There was an item on the news this evening about someone who had to sell their home in order to get the private care they needed because they had to wait so long for their treatment under the NHS.
HOWARD: These are all people who've paid their taxes.
HOWARD: They've paid towards the cost of their NHS treatment.
QUESTIONER_0: The poorest won't get advantage of this.
QUESTIONER_0: People really can't afford anything.
QUESTIONER_0: You'll be giving a bit of money, as I understand it.
HOWARD: We'll be giving half the cost of an NHS operation if someone wants to go private.
HOWARD: And these are all people who've paid their taxes.
HOWARD: They've paid for the cost of their NHS operation.
HOWARD: They're lessening the NHS waiting lists by going into the private sector.
HOWARD: I think it's only fair that they should get a proportion of what it would have cost the NHS after all.
HOWARD: It's a good deal for the NHS, because instead of having to pay for the whole of the cost of the operation, they're only paying a contribution, a half of it, and that person goes off the waiting list.
HOWARD: Would you do the same for schools?
HOWARD: People wanting to go private?
HOWARD: No.
HOWARD: What we would do for schools...
HOWARD: Same principle, isn't it?
HOWARD: It's not quite, because we're very practical about this, we're very pragmatic.
HOWARD: There's a difference between the two.
HOWARD: The problem in health
HOWARD: is overwhelmingly one of capacity, so we want to encourage more capacity.
HOWARD: The problem in education is a bit different.
HOWARD: You don't have children on waiting lists in general.
HOWARD: I know there are some in London at the moment, and that's a disgrace.
HOWARD: But in general, children are not on waiting lists to go to school.
HOWARD: It's a question of choice and quality and standards, and so we would encourage... What we say is, if private sector can provide education at the same cost as the state, then children and parents should be able to choose that private school.
HOWARD: But only if it's the same cost as the state.
QUESTIONER_0: I have to stop you there, Mr. Howard.
QUESTIONER_0: I'm sorry, Jack Skillen wasn't able to ask his question, which is, are you thinking what we are thinking?
QUESTIONER_0: Well, let me just say one thing.
QUESTIONER_0: No, you can't.
QUESTIONER_0: I'm sorry, your time's up.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you very much indeed.
QUESTIONER_0: Well, all right.
QUESTIONER_0: Finally, tonight, the man who wants to lead the Labour Party to a third victory after eight years at number 10, the Prime Minister, Tony Blair.
QUESTIONER_0: Hello.
QUESTIONER_0: Mr Blair, your first question comes from Christopher Jones, please.
QUESTIONER_33: Hello.
QUESTIONER_33: Why did you consider it inappropriate to give the Cabinet the benefit of the Attorney General's full opinion regarding the legality of military action against Iraq?
BLAIR: because we had the Attorney General there at Cabinet, and he was able to tell people his opinion, explain his reasoning, answer any questions that they had.
BLAIR: And in the end, remember, for the past few days, it's been said that the Attorney General advised that it was illegal to go to war.
BLAIR: He didn't.
BLAIR: He advised it was lawful.
BLAIR: Now, I totally understand why there will be people in this audience tonight who very, very strongly disagree with my decision to take this country to war in Iran.
BLAIR: OK. All I can say to you is this.
BLAIR: It's not a matter of the Attorney-General's advice, because it's been shown that he advised it was lawful.
BLAIR: Neither is the matter of misusing the intelligence.
BLAIR: There have been four inquiries into that.
BLAIR: It is, however, a question of a difficult decision I had to take.
BLAIR: Was it better to leave Saddam in power or put him in prison?
BLAIR: I think it was better to put him in prison.
QUESTIONER_0: Christopher Jones' question isn't about the Attorney General's final decision.
QUESTIONER_0: It's about this document, which you have been avoiding publishing for the past two years, and were forced to publish at half past eleven this morning, suddenly.
QUESTIONER_0: And it's, did this document go before Cabinet?
QUESTIONER_0: And if not, why not?
QUESTIONER_0: And did this document go before the House of Commons?
QUESTIONER_0: With all its hesitations, reservations, explanations, so that your backbench MPs had a chance to study the whole background to the legal decision that he then made.
BLAIR: In respect of Parliament, the Attorney General's advice is never published to Parliament.
BLAIR: It's been published, I think, three times over the last hundred years.
BLAIR: And yet it's now.
BLAIR: Exactly.
BLAIR: Published to everybody.
BLAIR: Exactly, because it's been leaked.
BLAIR: And therefore, you might as well have the full opinion.
BLAIR: In respect of Cabinet, the reason why we didn't give people the advice is we actually had the Attorney General there in Cabinet.
BLAIR: And there isn't any doubt about it.
BLAIR: And was all this ground covered?
BLAIR: The Attorney General went through his reasoning and explained to Cabinet why, in his view,
BLAIR: there was a reasonable case that could be made that the action was lawful.
BLAIR: Now, that is what has happened.
BLAIR: And look, as I say, in the end, you can frame this any way you want.
BLAIR: But the question was, when we were faced with the situation, I think it's important people understand this.
BLAIR: Back in March 2003, we were trying to get a second United Nations resolution.
BLAIR: We couldn't get one.
BLAIR: because France said they would not accept any resolution with an ultimatum to Saddam.
BLAIR: In the end, therefore, I had to decide.
BLAIR: We had 250,000 UK and US troops down there.
BLAIR: It was a tough decision, it was a difficult one.
BLAIR: I don't expect people, everyone, to agree with it.
BLAIR: I don't disrespect people who take a completely different point of view.
BLAIR: But I'm afraid this was an occasion, there was no fence to sit on, I had to take the decision and I took it.
QUESTIONER_0: OK. Christopher Jones, you asked a question.
QUESTIONER_0: You want to come back on that?
QUESTIONER_33: Yeah, the thing I don't understand is, given the importance of the decision, and I take your point that the Attorney-General was there in Cabinet, but I read that opinion today and it makes interesting reading, and I just can't understand why the Cabinet, who are a bunch of clever individuals who you rely on, weren't given the opportunity to see that document as well as question the Attorney-General.
BLAIR: But because they actually had the Attorney General there in person.
BLAIR: And therefore, in a sense, what was important was that he was able to take them through the reasoning in person and say to them...
QUESTIONER_33: But not that piece of paper?
BLAIR: No, because he was there able to explain it orally himself.
BLAIR: And look, in the end, the only question is, did the Attorney General advise that the war was lawful?
BLAIR: He did.
BLAIR: But in the end, the decision about this
BLAIR: It isn't really to do with the Attorney General.
BLAIR: It was a political decision that had to be taken.
BLAIR: Look, you know, I've been over this ground I don't know how many times in the last couple of years, and I totally understand why some people feel that this was the wrong decision to take.
BLAIR: But I happen to believe, for the reasons that I gave, it was the right decision.
BLAIR: All right.
BLAIR: Let's hear from you, sir.
QUESTIONER_5: Did any member of the Cabinet ask to read the Attorney General's guidance?
BLAIR: No, no member of the Cabinet asked for it because the Attorney General was there and able to take them through it personally.
BLAIR: You, Madam?
QUESTIONER_34: Was the Attorney General present at the Cabinet meeting before or after he changed his mind?
BLAIR: He didn't...
BLAIR: With respect, he didn't change his mind.
BLAIR: The 7th of March advice was, which has now been published, was that it was lawful.
BLAIR: And when he came to Cabinet, he explained, as he says in his advice, of course it's better to have a second resolution, but if you can't get one, then the action is still lawful for the reasons that he gave.
BLAIR: All right, the woman here.
QUESTIONER_17: I think it's very interesting that you decide to describe your decision as a political decision.
QUESTIONER_17: What it was was a political decision to support your best mate, George Bush.
QUESTIONER_17: The other point is you always say, oh, it's perfectly OK because Saddam Hussein is a really nasty guy.
QUESTIONER_17: Clearly, that is self-evidently true.
QUESTIONER_17: It is also an academic point.
QUESTIONER_17: The reality is George Bush would have invaded and removed Saddam Hussein without your support.
BLAIR: Oh, first of all...
BLAIR: It wasn't an academic point for the hundreds of thousands of Iraqis who lost their lives under Saddam Hussein.
BLAIR: It was important for them.
BLAIR: Now, you may say that I took the action simply for America.
BLAIR: I didn't.
BLAIR: I took it because I believed it was in the interest of this country.
BLAIR: If we had backed away and left Saddam in power,
BLAIR: stronger because we had backed away, I think that would have been bad for the security of our region and our world and therefore of this country.
BLAIR: As I say, you can conduct this debate in whichever way you want, but I took that decision in good faith.
BLAIR: Sometimes, when you are sitting in my seat as Prime Minister, you have to take the decision.
BLAIR: That is the decision I took.
QUESTIONER_17: Prime Minister but it is your job to make the right decision and you made the wrong one.
BLAIR: Well that's your view but it's interesting isn't it that today we actually have a democratic government being formed in Iraq.
BLAIR: Isn't that something we should actually be proud that we helped bring about?
QUESTIONER_35: As I understand it, the Attorney General expressed reservations about the legality of the war.
QUESTIONER_35: Why not just give the full legal opinion?
QUESTIONER_35: Because many MPs might have changed their mind under those circumstances.
QUESTIONER_35: The other point is, when you presented your evidence to the House of Commons, you said it was authoritative and full evidence.
QUESTIONER_35: I can't remember the words.
QUESTIONER_35: Yet the intelligence said to you it was sporadic and patchy.
QUESTIONER_35: That is a lie.
QUESTIONER_35: You lie to this country and that's why we can't support you at the following election.
BLAIR: Thank you.
BLAIR: You're going to have to make your decision about that.
BLAIR: Before you make that decision, though, the interesting thing about the intelligence, and there have been four inquiries into this, all of which have found the same thing, that I acted in good faith in relation to the intelligence.
BLAIR: But before you make that decision, you can actually go onto the website, I think it's with the Butler Report, and you can read the judgments of the Joint Intelligence Committee about Saddam Hussein and weapons of mass destruction.
BLAIR: Now, I just ask you, before you make that allegation again, go and read that and then tell me there was no evidence at all before me.
QUESTIONER_35: Why don't you have a full independent inquiry answering all the questions rather than just specific worded questions which you decide upon?
BLAIR: Do you know how many inquiries we've had?
BLAIR: You decide the wording every time.
BLAIR: The Hutton inquiry was a six-month inquiry.
BLAIR: The Foreign Affairs Committee decided their own terms of reference, so did the Intelligence Committee.
BLAIR: We have had four inquiries, we could have another four.
BLAIR: And frankly, after that, we could have another four.
QUESTIONER_35: full public inquiry.
QUESTIONER_0: We've already had one.
QUESTIONER_0: Mr Blair, you mentioned the Butler inquiry and cited it in your own defence.
QUESTIONER_0: Can I just quote you from Butler?
QUESTIONER_0: He said that the intelligence, which as the young man said correctly, was described by the JIC as sporadic and patchy, that the dossier you produced in September went to the outer limits of that intelligence and that by calling it extensive, detailed and authoritative, you may have reinforced that impression.
QUESTIONER_0: isn't that saying, not that you lied, but that you exaggerated, you over-egged, you misled, you sailed a bit close to the wind when you put across this intelligence to the British public?
BLAIR: What I do accept, frankly, in retrospect, is that it would have been better just to have published the Joint Intelligence Committee reports.
BLAIR: I think that would have been a better way of doing it, because then you wouldn't have had this argument.
BLAIR: And that's why I said to this young man here that...
QUESTIONER_0: It doesn't answer my question, that.
QUESTIONER_0: You said it was extensive, detailed and authoritative.
QUESTIONER_0: Yes, it was.
QUESTIONER_0: you off for saying that?
QUESTIONER_0: And you keep saying perhaps I shouldn't have said anything at all.
QUESTIONER_0: Do you mean you were wrong to say that about it?
BLAIR: No, I don't mean that.
BLAIR: But you accept it wasn't that?
BLAIR: What I mean is that Butler said, and I think this is right and I've accepted this, because I'm not saying there haven't been mistakes made and things for which I have to take responsibility.
BLAIR: but I think that in the end what would have been better in retrospect is just to have published the raw intelligence and then people could have seen exactly what the Joint Intelligence Committee actually said to me and that's why I say to you and to anybody here or anybody listening to the program you can go and read the intelligence I got and then make up your own mind as to whether I'm a liar or not.
QUESTIONER_36: Mr Blair, the whole perception of where we are with yourself at the moment is, you come along, you tell us in 1997 that you're going to be totally transparent, whiter than white.
QUESTIONER_36: We've had you telling us dossiers that you've got produced to get them past the Labour Party, to get them past the Parliamentary Labour Party.
QUESTIONER_36: You've bounced them in with documents that have been sorted out on settees, no doubt, and here we are today.
QUESTIONER_36: Well, I have to say, you keep saying to us over the last two days that you will make the difficult decisions.
QUESTIONER_36: You will do.
QUESTIONER_36: That's what you're paid to do.
QUESTIONER_36: What you're also paid to do is listen to the experts, listen to the advice that you're being given, and make an informed decision.
QUESTIONER_36: I have to say, I certainly don't think you are transparent from what I hear at the moment.
QUESTIONER_36: That's without the Mandelson sagas, the indulges, and that is where you are battling now.
QUESTIONER_36: You are fighting a rearguard action on the transparency that you told us that when we cleared the other lot out in 97, you were going to be the white man in white armour to come along and make it all whiter than white.
BLAIR: You haven't done it.
BLAIR: Well, why don't we, instead of dealing with perception, we deal with the reality.
BLAIR: And if you doubt the position that I'm saying on the intelligence, as I say, the great thing is you can go and read it for yourself and make up your own mind about that.
BLAIR: But I like to think that also there are certain changes we've made in this country that we can be proud of as a government.
BLAIR: I don't disagree with that.
QUESTIONER_36: Where I do disagree with you fundamentally is you have committed yourself to support Mr Bush, you have then got to come back here, you have got to get it passed,
QUESTIONER_36: left-wing side of your party, with all due respect, you struggled to get it passed, you lost cabinet ministers over it, and here we are today, we have dragged this out of you today.
BLAIR: I think you have made the point.
BLAIR: I think that is a point that is worth responding head-on to.
BLAIR: In the end, yes, I did have to struggle very hard to get this through.
BLAIR: But the reason I did it was because I thought it was the right thing to do.
BLAIR: I didn't take this on myself for reasons just because I thought, let's give myself a really hard time for a couple of years.
QUESTIONER_36: All right, sorry, I think you've made your case.
BLAIR: No, that's a reasonable enough point.
BLAIR: All I say to you on the other stuff is, if you go back and have a look at what I read, then, you know, drop me a line and tell me what you think about it afterwards.
BLAIR: The woman there in grey.
QUESTIONER_37: Brian Sedgmore said that you'd pretty much made up your mind after going to speak to George Blair, before you'd even spoken to... George Bush, I think.
QUESTIONER_37: George...
Sorry.
QUESTIONER_37: George Bush.
QUESTIONER_37: Freudian slip there.
QUESTIONER_37: All right.
QUESTIONER_37: OK.
QUESTIONER_37: I am... Freudian slip.
QUESTIONER_37: All right.
QUESTIONER_37: Before you'd even spoken to your own Cabinet.
QUESTIONER_37: And as well as that, if you weren't fraudulent, you're grossly negligent, and for that you should be resigning anyway.
BLAIR: Right.
BLAIR: APPLAUSE
BLAIR: First of all, I don't really know how Brian Sedgmore would know, since I don't think he was ever present at any discussion I ever had with George Bush.
BLAIR: In fact, I don't even remember ever discussing it with Brian Sedgmore.
BLAIR: But secondly, you've got to make up your mind about it.
BLAIR: Look, I've taken my decision.
BLAIR: And I would just like to point out to you that in the end, if I'd taken a different decision, that too would have had difficult consequences.
BLAIR: If I decided the course that you want me to take, Saddam Hussein would still be in charge of Iraq today.
BLAIR: People would have been dying in Iraq.
BLAIR: Without television cameras there, it's true, but they were.
BLAIR: Don't speak to me about it, speak to Iraqis about it.
BLAIR: That is why the decision was difficult.
BLAIR: It was difficult to remove him.
BLAIR: It was difficult to leave him there.
QUESTIONER_0: I took the decision I thought was right for the country.
QUESTIONER_0: I want to move on because I have to watch the clock here.
QUESTIONER_0: I will go to another question now.
QUESTIONER_22: What new stealth taxis do you plan to introduce first?
BLAIR: Well, I don't plan any, but... Because I just crept up on you, didn't I?
BLAIR: What I would say to you is, this country still remains one of the lowest-taxed countries in the whole of Europe.
BLAIR: Actually, taxes as a proportion of national income is lower than most of the years Margaret Thatcher is in.
BLAIR: And, yes, it's true, we raised national insurance in the last Parliament.
BLAIR: That is absolutely true, to pay for the National Health Service.
BLAIR: I don't regret that.
BLAIR: I think it's good that we are now making improvements in our National Health Service as a result of that investment.
QUESTIONER_0: Of course, you did say in your manifesto that expansion would come without any need to increase money, and you never mentioned one less in your manifesto, and you never said you were going to put up money after the election.
QUESTIONER_0: You got through that election suggesting to the electorate that you weren't going to increase taxes, let alone put 1% on.
BLAIR: We didn't have to for the commitments that we had, but it's true.
BLAIR: We got the report that said, if you want to get your health service spending up to the European Union average, you're going to have to put more money in.
BLAIR: Now, even with that additional money, I think it's worth just pointing out that the National Health Service, as a result of that, is getting the largest increase investment it's had since it was created.
BLAIR: And I think the National Health Service is improving as a result.
BLAIR: And that is surely better than going down the path of forcing people to take out private medical insurance.
QUESTIONER_0: The man in the white shirt back there.
QUESTIONER_26: Mr Blair, I think you're very lucky that we have a weak opposition at the moment.
BLAIR: Right.
BLAIR: Do you want to expand on that, or is that it?
BLAIR: I take that as not a compliment, so... OK, the man in the grey shirt there, at the very back row.
QUESTIONER_0: No, in the back row there, yes.
QUESTIONER_38: Mr Blair... We're untaxed, remember.
QUESTIONER_38: Mr Blair, your government has spent an extra £150 billion on the NHS and schools over the last eight years.
QUESTIONER_38: What improvements have we seen as a result and can our country afford to waste that kind of money?
BLAIR: Well, I don't believe it is wasted.
BLAIR: Look, I visit schools and hospitals the whole time.
BLAIR: I go in there, I see investment in schools, I see it in new school buildings, in computers, in additional teachers.
BLAIR: I go into the health services.
BLAIR: There's barely a health service site you visit without new buildings being put up, new wards, scanners, extra nurses.
BLAIR: I don't
BLAIR: I don't misunderstand this at all.
BLAIR: There are still big problems that we need to deal with.
BLAIR: But I think if you look at our National Health Service today, we can be proud of it again.
BLAIR: It's improvements happening in the National Health Service.
BLAIR: If you go into the schools, you can see the extra investment in there.
BLAIR: That's on the basis of a strong economy, and that's why I want to keep that investment going in.
BLAIR: And I don't accept the Conservative charge it's all wasted or it's all going on bureaucrats.
BLAIR: Actually, it's going to give our kids a better education and people a better deal on health.
OK.
QUESTIONER_0: The woman there in black.
QUESTIONER_37: Can we have some more cleaners, please?
QUESTIONER_0: Yes, that's a good point.
QUESTIONER_0: And the woman further along in grey.
QUESTIONER_39: If the National Health Service has improved, why am I still waiting for eight months for a consultation?
QUESTIONER_39: Where's the improvement?
QUESTIONER_39: I visit a filthy hospital.
QUESTIONER_39: I visited casualty a couple of weeks ago.
QUESTIONER_39: There was a four-hour wait.
QUESTIONER_39: I don't see an improvement.
QUESTIONER_39: Where is it?
BLAIR: Well, I think there is real improvement in the health service.
BLAIR: I'm really sorry if you've been waiting an unacceptable period of time.
BLAIR: I don't know whether there are other people here who have used the health service recently, but I actually think when you go into our healthcare system, I'm not saying everyone, and I'm sorry that you've had a bad experience, but I think, on the whole, people get a very good service out of our National Health Service today.
BLAIR: You, sir.
QUESTIONER_40: You certainly should be congratulated about the investment you've made.
QUESTIONER_40: You've doubled the figures from 33 to 67 billion this year.
QUESTIONER_40: Don't you find it surprising that you're still more likely to catch an infection in a hospital than getting knocked over in the street?
BLAIR: Well, if you're referring to MRSA, it is a real problem and we're tackling it.
BLAIR: We're putting in the matrons and the cleaning that's necessary.
BLAIR: But let me just say this to you.
BLAIR: I don't think that should, as it were, stain the whole of the health service.
BLAIR: I honestly believe that our National Health Service, and I probably visit more hospitals and talk to more people in the health service than any Prime Minister before me,
BLAIR: I think that of course there are real issues and real difficulties.
BLAIR: All healthcare systems have that.
BLAIR: But I think when you go into, for example, an accident and emergency department nowadays, you can see a change and an improvement.
BLAIR: I think for many people who used to wait, for example, you take cardiac care.
BLAIR: people used to wait months and months, years even, to get the treatment that they need.
BLAIR: They don't wait that long anymore.
BLAIR: If you take cataracts, for example, as a result of the changes we've brought in, big change has happened.
BLAIR: In cancer, we now save, literally, I think it's something like 10,000 deaths a year as a result of changes that have been brought in.
BLAIR: Now, I'm not saying it's all perfect, don't misunderstand me, but I am saying it's a darn sight better than what we inherited from the Conservatives in 1997.
QUESTIONER_0: No, please, the man in the green shirt, the dark green shirt.
QUESTIONER_41: Yes, you're actually putting forward targets on practically everything for timescales.
QUESTIONER_41: I can't get an appointment with my local GP unless it's made within 48 hours.
QUESTIONER_41: I can't make it three days or four days hence.
QUESTIONER_41: I was told that's because they can make their target that everybody gets it within 48 hours.
BLAIR: Well, I'm absolutely astonished at that.
BLAIR: Look, come on, let's be sensible about this.
BLAIR: I don't know about this individual case, obviously, but I would be absolutely astonished if you're saying to your GP, I don't need to see you for four days, and he's insisting he sees you in two.
BLAIR: The reason...
QUESTIONER_3: The doctor is asking you to come back in a week.
QUESTIONER_3: You can't make the appointment in a week because you're only allowed to make it 48 hours beforehand.
QUESTIONER_3: This is my son's appointment last week.
QUESTIONER_3: You have to sit on the phone for three hours in the morning, trying to get an appointment, because you're not allowed to ask for the appointment before that, because by making it 48 hours beforehand, they're meeting the government target.
BLAIR: Is this news to you?
BLAIR: I have to say...
BLAIR: Hold on, hold on.
BLAIR: Is this news to you?
BLAIR: That is news to me, that doctors are insisting that you have to come within the 48 hours.
QUESTIONER_3: A doctor's appointment is to turn up outside the appointment at 8 o'clock in the morning waiting for you.
BLAIR: The whole purpose of this was that people used to be able, used not to be able rather, to get an appointment with the GP within the 48 hours.
BLAIR: Now obviously it shouldn't work in that way because that would be absurd.
QUESTIONER_3: No, you can't get it at all unless it is within the 48 hours.
BLAIR: Anybody else have this experience?
QUESTIONER_0: What?
QUESTIONER_6: Just explain it to the Prime Minister.
QUESTIONER_6: If I ring up and ask, say, on the Monday for an appointment, on the Wednesday, no, you'll have to ring back Wednesday morning.
BLAIR: Sorry, but there's quite a lot of people who have said this.
BLAIR: I understand that, but surely they're not saying to you that you have to have it quicker than you wanted.
QUESTIONER_0: They're saying you can't make the appointment until you're within the time frame that allows it to be 48 hours.
QUESTIONER_0: So you can't make it today, you come back and make it on Wednesday.
QUESTIONER_3: Even if the doctor asked you to come back a week later?
BLAIR: I will look into that.
BLAIR: The purpose of the target, just so you know, is that it used to be the case that people would phone the GP and not be able to get an appointment for a week or two weeks when they wanted it quickly.
BLAIR: I agree, the target obviously should not work in that way.
BLAIR: That is a perfectly sensible point.
BLAIR: I will have a look at it.
BLAIR: It obviously should not work like that.
BLAIR: The purpose of these targets
BLAIR: just so that I explain the situation, is to try and make sure that you get minimum quality and standards and are seen quickly.
BLAIR: Now, obviously, it should not work in the opposite way.
QUESTIONER_0: OK. Just before we started on tax, just one question on tax.
QUESTIONER_0: At the last election, you were asked on Newsnight whether you thought any reasonable person shouldn't suppose, because there was no commitment not to increase national insurance, that the tax would go up.
QUESTIONER_0: And you said they shouldn't.
QUESTIONER_0: suppose.
QUESTIONER_0: Should or shouldn't we suppose now?
BLAIR: Well, the plans that we have got are fully costed and taken account of.
BLAIR: They were last time round.
BLAIR: They were.
BLAIR: What happened was, as I just explained, we got the report on healthcare spending that said if you want to reach the European average, you are going to have to put more money in.
BLAIR: Should we or shouldn't we now suppose there will be a further increase?
BLAIR: I can't sit and write the budget.
QUESTIONER_0: You are the Prime Minister and your friend is the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
QUESTIONER_0: And we've seen him side by side throughout this election campaign, so presumably you know what's in his mind.
BLAIR: Yes, of course I know what's in his mind.
BLAIR: And what's in his mind is to carry on running the strongest economy in the Western world, and thank goodness he's been doing it.
BLAIR: Or to become Prime Minister.
BLAIR: Well, that may be there too.
BLAIR: But before we get to that stage, David, we've got to win this election, and there's a long way to go.
QUESTIONER_0: Oh, right.
QUESTIONER_0: Oh, so he is going to become Prime Minister?
BLAIR: No, I haven't said that either.
BLAIR: I've simply said that before anybody has the right to say they're going to be Prime Minister, we've got to get through the next week.
QUESTIONER_0: You've said you're going to stand down during this next Parliament.
QUESTIONER_0: Are you going to vote for him as leader of the Labour Party?
BLAIR: I think before we get to that, we better win this election first.
QUESTIONER_0: No, whether we win...
BLAIR: I've answered this question 1,000 times and I've always said that Gordon would make an excellent Prime Minister but I'm not getting into selecting the next Prime Minister when I can't even be sure I'm going to be in my own... No, but we're just talking about the leader of the Labour Party.
BLAIR: and whether you win the election or not.
QUESTIONER_0: I'm just asking you, when the leadership battle comes, you've announced it's going to come because you said you're standing down.
QUESTIONER_0: When it comes, will you vote for Gordon Brown?
BLAIR: At some point, you have to stand down in any event, which is why I answered the question.
BLAIR: Will you vote for your good friend Gordon Brown?
BLAIR: And let us wait and see what happens at a later stage.
BLAIR: I've always said, however, he would make an extremely good Prime Minister of this country.
BLAIR: But you haven't decided yet.
BLAIR: It's not that I haven't decided, it's that I'm not getting in.
BLAIR: I'm not getting into those questions until we've decided this election and actually that's for the public to decide.
QUESTIONER_0: Well I wonder what he has to do to get your vote.
QUESTIONER_0: Anyway let's go on to another question.
QUESTIONER_0: Andrew Thwaites please.
QUESTIONER_0: Andrew Thwaites.
QUESTIONER_42: Yes, I wonder if you could clarify what you meant in your 2001 manifesto when you said we will not introduce top-up fees and have legislated to prevent them.
BLAIR: What we've done now is introduce a completely different system of student finance.
BLAIR: It's not top-up fees as with the old system where you paid the fees as you went through university.
BLAIR: It's important people understand what this proposal is.
BLAIR: From now on, people will pay no fees as they go through university.
BLAIR: They will then, and there will be maintenance grants, reintroduce £3,000 a year for the poorest students.
BLAIR: Then when students graduate, they will pay back into the pot a fair repayment system based on their ability to pay.
BLAIR: So, for example,
BLAIR: If you stop work, or you're a woman and you start to raise a family, or, for example, for any reason, you become ill or unemployed, you don't pay.
BLAIR: And the system is one in which we're able to get more money into the universities, more people able to go to university, without anyone having to pay fees as they go through the system.
BLAIR: You didn't say that in the manifesto, did you?
BLAIR: No, I didn't say that about maintenance grants being reintroduced for poor students.
QUESTIONER_0: You just said you weren't going to introduce top-up fees and had legislated to prevent them.
QUESTIONER_0: Yes, but where's the legislation to prevent them, Tony?
QUESTIONER_42: Where is it?
QUESTIONER_42: Yes, but this is... No, I want... Where is it?
QUESTIONER_42: Where is the legislation to prevent top-up fees?
QUESTIONER_42: You said there was legislation to prevent them.
BLAIR: Where is it?
BLAIR: We had legislated...
BLAIR: It doesn't exist.
BLAIR: No, I'm sorry.
BLAIR: It existed because we said we were going not to introduce...
BLAIR: When did it exist?
BLAIR: The legislation prevented us introducing top-up fees.
BLAIR: The legislation we then introduced in this Parliament changes the system entirely.
BLAIR: And instead of paying any fees as you go through university, you make a fair repayment after you graduate.
BLAIR: Now, the only alternative to that, with the greatest respect, is either the Lib Dem one, which is to impose this 50% top rate of tax and pay for everything through that,
BLAIR: or the Conservative one, which is to privatise the student loan book, which will end up with graduates paying a real credit card rate of interest on their student debt.
BLAIR: Now, I happen to think our system is fairer.
BLAIR: We already, incidentally, in this country... You shake your head, but it's true.
QUESTIONER_42: I think it's easy for you
QUESTIONER_42: you to say you went to university for free.
QUESTIONER_42: You went to university for free and there was an option.
QUESTIONER_42: You gave us one option as students.
QUESTIONER_42: You gave us one option.
QUESTIONER_42: It's this way or nothing.
QUESTIONER_42: And now you're saying, oh, but it's fairer.
QUESTIONER_42: What would be fairer was if you, people that have graduated, started paying back too.
QUESTIONER_42: And I know there's a lot of people.
QUESTIONER_42: There are loads of people that have graduated that would not mind doing that.
QUESTIONER_42: And it's easy for you to sit there and say to me, who's now got debts of £8,000 and £10,000, that it's fairer.
QUESTIONER_42: It's not fairer on me, because you got your education for free, Mr Prime Minister.
BLAIR: Yeah, but, Andrew, when I was going through university, there were 5% of school leavers that went through university.
BLAIR: Right?
BLAIR: Now it is 40% of school leavers.
BLAIR: I put more investment, or you do, actually, as the taxpayer.
BLAIR: You put more investment into a student's education at university than you do into a secondary school pupil's or a primary school pupil's.
BLAIR: Even under our new system, five-sixths of the money comes from the ordinary taxpayer.
BLAIR: I don't think it's too much, instead of taking more money from the ordinary taxpayer, to ask people, when they graduate, to pay something back into the pot.
BLAIR: I think that's a darn sight fairer than putting taxes on the ordinary population.
QUESTIONER_43: Mr Blair, I made an important observation since September, in that every MP I've spoken to, and when I ask them about you, they all say that you're a great politician.
QUESTIONER_43: But isn't it worrying that none of them, and I mean none of them, have actually referred to you as a good leader?
BLAIR: I don't quite know who you've spoken to, obviously, but it's...
BLAIR: The decision...
QUESTIONER_0: I tried to ask him to give the names.
QUESTIONER_0: No, I don't, but... You can give the names.
QUESTIONER_0: Go on, then, name the names.
QUESTIONER_0: Name them.
QUESTIONER_0: Serious?
QUESTIONER_0: Yes.
BLAIR: We're always serious on this show.
BLAIR: Look, you're going to have to make up your own mind about that.
BLAIR: Look, there's no point in me sitting here and saying, oh, yes, I am a good leader or I'm not.
BLAIR: You're going to have to decide who you want to lead this country.
BLAIR: And on May the 6th, you're either going to have Michael Howard walk into number 10 Downing Street or me.
BLAIR: And if you want to keep the economy strong and the investment in our public services there and the measures to help families in this country that we've introduced in the past few years, you should vote for the leadership that's delivered.
BLAIR: Hang on a second.
QUESTIONER_0: Hang on a second.
QUESTIONER_0: The woman in cream there.
QUESTIONER_44: I was going back to the university question.
QUESTIONER_44: Yes.
QUESTIONER_44: Do you think that perhaps 40% of school leavers going to university is too many because a lot of them can't get jobs once they leave university?
BLAIR: I'll be brief, Mr Blair, if you want.
BLAIR: It's entirely up to them.
BLAIR: I don't force anyone to go to university.
BLAIR: But if people want to go, you've got to have a system of funding universities that's fair.
BLAIR: Fair to the student, fair to the taxpayer.
BLAIR: A system that is linked to people's ability to pay when they pay nothing going through university is a lot fairer than a system where we prevent, as the Conservatives would do, by a cap on the university numbers, people who want to go to university going there.
BLAIR: I think that's a return to the elitism of the past and I don't want it in this country.
QUESTIONER_0: Mr Blair, can I just ask you one last question?
QUESTIONER_0: We've had Mr Kennedy in that chair, we've had Mr Howard in that chair, why wouldn't you debate directly, face to face, with them?
BLAIR: I debate every week in the House of Commons with Michael Howard.
BLAIR: I'm here to answer questions tonight.
BLAIR: And I probably do more discussions, not just with audiences like this, but with people when we talk about the issues than any politician before me.
QUESTIONER_0: All right.
QUESTIONER_0: Mr. Blair, Mr. Blair, thank you.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you very much.
QUESTIONER_0: Sorry, hang on.
BLAIR: Thank you very much.
QUESTIONER_0: No, no, no, no, no.
QUESTIONER_0: We've reached the end of our time.
QUESTIONER_0: I'm sorry.
QUESTIONER_0: Will you be quiet?
QUESTIONER_0: Mr. Blair, thank you very much indeed.
QUESTIONER_0: And... That... That...
QUESTIONER_0: Sit down, if you would.
QUESTIONER_0: That ends this special edition of Question Time.
