QUESTIONER_0: Now, both leaders are going to make opening and closing statements.
QUESTIONER_0: The order was decided by the toss of a coin.
QUESTIONER_0: Jeremy Corbyn won the toss and elected to go first.
QUESTIONER_0: Jeremy Corbyn, would you give us your opening statement, please?
CORBYN: Thank you.
CORBYN: Labour is ambitious for our country, and ambitious for you.
CORBYN: I want to build a society where there is real opportunity for all, where everyone feels supported and secure, and where everybody has dignity in old age.
CORBYN: There are now four million children living in poverty in our country.
CORBYN: People can't get appointments to see their GP.
CORBYN: Elderly people can't get the care they need.
CORBYN: And millions of families are struggling to pay bills and make ends meet.
CORBYN: They need an ambitious government on their side that will put money in their pockets, save our NHS, rebuild our public services, deliver free personal care for older people and free education for all.
CORBYN: Yes, that does mean asking those with the broadest shoulders to pay a bit more in tax.
CORBYN: A vote for Labour is a vote for hope, for real change and for a country that works for the many, not just the few.
CORBYN: Mr Corbyn, thank you.
QUESTIONER_0: Mr Johnson, would you like to make your opening statement, please?
JOHNSON: On Thursday next week, this country reaches a turning point.
JOHNSON: We can get Brexit done.
JOHNSON: We can end the paralysis.
JOHNSON: We can transform our country with massive investments in health, 50,000 more nurses, more funding for every school, 20,000 more police.
JOHNSON: We can spread opportunity fairly with fantastic infrastructure, education and technology.
JOHNSON: And the only way to unleash the potential of this whole country is if we get a working-majority Conservative government.
JOHNSON: Because the only possible alternative is another hung Parliament, with Jeremy Corbyn and Nicola Sturgeon, with an economic agenda that would take this country back decades, and two referendums, one on Scotland and a second, toxic and divisive, referendum on the EU.
JOHNSON: Let's give that nightmare a miss.
JOHNSON: Let's end the chaos, the deadlock.
JOHNSON: Let's get Brexit done with a one-nation Conservative government and take this country forwards.
QUESTIONER_0: Boris Johnson, thank you very much indeed.
QUESTIONER_0: Well, let's get on with our questions now.
QUESTIONER_0: Almost no rules tonight.
QUESTIONER_0: Questions will be posed by the audience.
QUESTIONER_0: Both men will get the chance to answer them and to debate their answers as well.
QUESTIONER_0: Our first question tonight comes from John Purcell.
QUESTIONER_0: John Purcell, please.
QUESTIONER_1: Is Sir John Major's recent intervention worrying to you, Mr Johnson?
QUESTIONER_1: And is Mr Blair's recent intervention worrying to you, Mr Corbyn?
QUESTIONER_1: Will these interventions make any difference to the result of the general election, or are they just a couple of old has-beens?
QUESTIONER_0: So the questioner, Mr Purcell, is referring to the fact that both John Major, your former leader, and Tony Blair, your former leader, have suggested that voters should consider voting for other parties and not giving you the majority you seek.
QUESTIONER_0: Boris Johnson, your answer to Mr Purcell, please.
JOHNSON: Well, Mr Purcell, John, I have the utmost respect, of course, for all former Conservative leaders and don't wish to deprecate anybody, as I have been.
JOHNSON: But I don't think he's right.
JOHNSON: And we have a fantastic plan to get Brexit done.
JOHNSON: It's a deal that's ready to go.
JOHNSON: It's oven ready.
JOHNSON: We can get it done by Christmas, get it back into Parliament by Christmas, if we have a majority Conservative government.
JOHNSON: I mean, unlike Mr Major, I lead a party that is now totally united.
JOHNSON: All 630-plus Conservative candidates at this election actually back my deal.
QUESTIONER_0: Totally united because you got rid of anybody you didn't agree with?
JOHNSON: No, we have a very, very broad spectrum of views in our party, but they all back our deal.
JOHNSON: Now, the mystery is what is the position of the Leader of the Opposition on this subject, because I have yet to hear what the deal is that he wants to achieve and whether he backs it himself.
QUESTIONER_0: Jeremy Corbyn, the question was, should you be worried about Tony Blair saying to people, don't necessarily vote Labour?
CORBYN: The issue coming up on Thursday is the future of this country.
CORBYN: Are we going to continue with this level of inequality, of poverty amongst our children, of underfunding of our schools, and a threat to our National Health Service, and a no-deal Brexit, which the Prime Minister is threatening us with, or a trade deal with Donald Trump and the USA, which will damage our public services?
CORBYN: A vote for Labour is a vote to end austerity.
CORBYN: A vote for Labour is to invest in the future of this country.
CORBYN: And so, Tony Blair and John Major are welcome to make the comments that they do.
CORBYN: I urge them to think for a moment, think for a moment, at the reality of what nine years of austerity has done to the people of this country.
QUESTIONER_0: What happened to your party, Mr Corbyn, that the most successful Labour Prime Minister in history cannot back you to move into number 10?
CORBYN: I am fighting this election to win it, to win it on our manifesto, to win it on our manifesto which I believe will bring real hope to those people that have been denied it during these years of austerity.
QUESTIONER_0: Isn't the truth that many voters think there's an impossible choice?
QUESTIONER_0: They don't want either of you in Number 10 Downing Street.
JOHNSON: Well, I hope very much that people will vote for a one-nation, conservative government and get Brexit done.
JOHNSON: And I think, actually, if you look at our agenda, it's positive, it's progressive, it will unite the country, involve massive investment in public services, and take us forward.
CORBYN: Our government will empower people.
CORBYN: Our government will not leave anybody behind.
CORBYN: That is the whole principle, the golden thread that runs through our manifesto.
QUESTIONER_0: Well, let's turn to Brexit.
QUESTIONER_0: It's already been raised many times already.
QUESTIONER_0: And on this question, we're going to take two questions, one from a Leave voter, one from a Remain voter.
QUESTIONER_0: So first of all, Yvonne Emerton, who voted Leave, please.
QUESTIONER_2: Brexit has taken up so much time already.
QUESTIONER_2: People are really fed up.
QUESTIONER_2: Can you guarantee that it will happen next year?
QUESTIONER_0: Can you guarantee it will happen next year?
QUESTIONER_0: And then Tom Clark, who voted Remain.
QUESTIONER_3: How would we be better off from the Brexit deal, or a future Labour deal, compared to what we already have as a member of the EU?
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you very much.
QUESTIONER_0: Let's turn first to Yvonne Emerton's question.
QUESTIONER_0: Can you guarantee that Brexit
QUESTIONER_0: will happen next year.
QUESTIONER_0: Jeremy Corbyn.
CORBYN: What I can guarantee is that we'll bring an end to this debate and we will have a final say for the people of this country.
CORBYN: We cannot go on forever saying we represent the 48 or the 52.
CORBYN: I want to lead a government that represents the whole country and the whole community.
CORBYN: So we will, within three months, negotiate a leave agreement with the European Union that will protect trade and jobs and the peace process in Northern Ireland.
CORBYN: and put that alongside remain in a referendum within six months.
CORBYN: And that will be the end of the matter.
CORBYN: My role as a leader of my party, as the Prime Minister would be, to ensure that decision is carried out whatever it is.
CORBYN: But nobody voted to lose their job or to lose trade with Europe.
CORBYN: people voted for many, many reasons, but I think we've got to come together and bring this issue to an end, not go down the road of sweetheart deals with the USA.
CORBYN: Boris Johnson.
JOHNSON: Well, I share the frustration of both our questions about the length of time it's taken to get Brexit done, and what we can do with the deal that we have is get it done by January 31st and come out, and then to get to the question about the advantages, we can do such things as improve our standards for animal welfare, ban the live export of animals,
JOHNSON: We can cut VAT on tampons.
JOHNSON: We can do things to create free ports around the country.
JOHNSON: There are all sorts of ways in which we can regulate differently and better.
JOHNSON: We can also, of course, control our immigration system for the first time in a long time.
JOHNSON: Now, what I haven't heard from the leader of the Labour Party is this deal that he thinks he can get in three months' time.
JOHNSON: Who is going to negotiate it?
JOHNSON: Because as far as I can see, everybody on the Labour frontbench is campaigning to remain, apart from
JOHNSON: Mr Corbyn, who is neutral on the matter, who is going to secure this deal?
JOHNSON: How can you get a deal, a new deal from Brussels for Brexit, if you don't actually believe in it?
JOHNSON: That's the mystery that I fell to.
QUESTIONER_0: Jeremy Corbyn, how do you get a deal, he asks, if you don't really believe in it?
QUESTIONER_0: And John McDonnell and Diane Abbott and Keir Starmer, all the rest, they say they're Remainers.
CORBYN: We get a deal in order
CORBYN: to ensure that whatever the outcome of final vote, the trade relationship continues with Europe.
CORBYN: If you go down the road, it will take seven years to negotiate a trade deal with the USA.
CORBYN: You're going to have queues all up the M20 in Kent.
CORBYN: You're going to have a problem of supply chain to all of our manufacturing industries.
CORBYN: You're going to have job losses on a huge scale.
CORBYN: deal with the EU to maintain that trade relationship?
JOHNSON: We have a deal.
JOHNSON: It is a wonderful deal.
JOHNSON: We are coming out on 31 January if we can get a working majority.
JOHNSON: I am afraid, listening to Mr Corbyn, it is absolutely clear that what would happen next year is a period of negotiation about this mystery deal, led by somebody in the Labour Party that we cannot yet identify, since Mr Corbyn does not believe in the deal himself.
JOHNSON: It would then be put to the
JOHNSON: to another referendum to the people of this country.
JOHNSON: Parliament, our country, would spend a whole year more, probably more, locked in debate about Brexit, when what people want to do is move on and focus on the issues facing the people of
JOHNSON: Jeremy Corbyn.
CORBYN: And that's what we can do immediately.
CORBYN: And Mr Johnson will spend at least seven years negotiating with the USA on access to our public services, on the price of medicines in Britain, on the access to our National Health Service.
CORBYN: And he knows he can't get a deal quickly with the USA because of the way in which the US political system works.
CORBYN: And so what he will do is walk out of a relationship with the EU into a relationship with nobody.
CORBYN: And that is where the chaos will come.
JOHNSON: What is your answer to that, Boris Johnson?
JOHNSON: I have to say, I'm afraid that shows a slight ignorance of the reality, which is that as we leave the EU, we are coming out with our deal, with a state of perfect equivalence, zero tariff, zero quota.
JOHNSON: We'll be able to begin not only putting in our Australian-style points-based system for immigration, taking back control of our laws, taking back control of our money.
JOHNSON: We'll also be able to...
JOHNSON: He asked you about trade, though, Mr Johnson.
JOHNSON: Trade talks, not just with countries around the world,
JOHNSON: But we will do a fantastic deal with the EU and with the US.
QUESTIONER_0: Can we be clear, Mr Johnson?
QUESTIONER_0: You again and again say the phrase, get Brexit done.
QUESTIONER_0: That's right.
QUESTIONER_0: But you haven't done a trade deal with the EU.
QUESTIONER_0: You don't know you can do a trade deal with the EU.
QUESTIONER_0: You don't know there won't be no deal on trade with the EU, do you?
JOHNSON: On the contrary, we have a fantastic deal.
JOHNSON: It is there, ready to go.
JOHNSON: Not on trade, forgive me.
JOHNSON: You don't have a trade deal.
JOHNSON: What our deal allows is for British businesses of all kinds to have perfect confidence in the way we leave the EU, because we are in a state of equivalence with zero tariff, zero quota, exact regulatory framework, and we have ample time to get on and build a new free trade partnership, not just with the EU, but with countries around the world.
JOHNSON: And the great beauty of this deal is that it gets Brexit done, gets it out of Parliament, stops the wrangling, stops the chaos, and moves us forward.
JOHNSON: Thank you very much.
JOHNSON: Jeremy Corbyn.
JOHNSON: Jeremy Corbyn.
CORBYN: Boris Johnson is going to spend years negotiating with the USA.
CORBYN: He's going to spend years ruling the fact he didn't reach a proper agreement with the EU before leaving.
CORBYN: And as the documents we've shown today indicate, he hasn't been exactly straightforward on the issues surrounding trade with Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland.
CORBYN: And so I do think we need a bit of openness from the government.
CORBYN: We forced them to release the documents, or we released them for them, actually, a week ago, which showed the access that the US were demanding to our public services.
CORBYN: And today, the news came out of what's happening with Northern Ireland.
CORBYN: for people who didn't hear the news, what are you claiming the documents show?
CORBYN: They show quite clearly that there are going to be charges, there are going to be customs checks, there are going to be restrictions on trade between Britain and Northern Ireland.
CORBYN: Thank you very much.
JOHNSON: Boris Johnson?
JOHNSON: Actually, that is not true.
JOHNSON: The whole of the UK comes out
JOHNSON: England, Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland together.
JOHNSON: We do free trade deals together.
JOHNSON: Northern Ireland is part of the customs territory of the UK and we are united.
JOHNSON: I have to say, I think it is a great opportunity for our country.
JOHNSON: It says unfettered access, I think is what it says.
JOHNSON: It says unfettered access.
JOHNSON: Question the fettering that will happen.
JOHNSON: One at a time, please.
JOHNSON: That is what the document also says.
JOHNSON: is that Northern Ireland is part of the customs territory of the UK.
QUESTIONER_0: Isn't the problem, Mr Johnson, that the DUP, the unionists who were your partners, they agree with him and not you?
JOHNSON: They don't, actually, because our deal is a great deal.
JOHNSON: Let me just make one point.
JOHNSON: I do find it slightly curious, to say the least, Nick, to be lectured about the union between Great Britain and Northern Ireland by a man who all his life, political life, has campaigned to break up that union and actually supported for four decades
JOHNSON: the IRA in their campaign violently, violently to destroy it.
JOHNSON: I must say I find it a curiosity.
JOHNSON: Jeremy Corbyn, what is your answer to that?
CORBYN: How about the Prime Minister showing a degree of honesty about the arrangements he's actually made with Northern Ireland?
CORBYN: He spoke at a DUP conference and said there would be no restrictions whatsoever.
CORBYN: We now know there are restrictions.
CORBYN: He should and could have said that at the time.
CORBYN: And so it is a question of openness on all of this.
QUESTIONER_0: that being open, he says, you've supported people who are opposed to the union your whole life.
QUESTIONER_0: You don't even believe it.
CORBYN: What I've done is always wanted to see a peace process in Northern Ireland, and that is exactly what we've got.
CORBYN: And thank you to the Labour government that negotiated it after 1996.
CORBYN: Now, gentlemen, briefly.
CORBYN: Thank you.
QUESTIONER_0: There was a second question.
QUESTIONER_0: I want to give you the chance.
QUESTIONER_0: If you remember, let me just remind you, Tom Clark asked you, Mr Johnson, how will we be better off from the Brexit deal or a future Labour deal compared to being in the EU?
JOHNSON: Please.
JOHNSON: Well, thanks very much, Tom.
JOHNSON: And there will be all sorts of ways.
JOHNSON: I've mentioned the ways we can cut VAT on sanitary products or regulate differently for bioscience or have free ports.
JOHNSON: ports in areas that need investment.
JOHNSON: You can trigger growth in investments in some of the left-behind coastal communities by having free ports, as 130 countries do around the world.
JOHNSON: We can't because of EU rules.
JOHNSON: Another major advantage is, of course, that we take back control of a lot of money that we'd otherwise send to the EU.
JOHNSON: But I might mention also
JOHNSON: our ability to control our immigration, which is not unimportant.
JOHNSON: I'm a believer in immigration for people of talent who want to come here, fantastic, but we've got to control it democratically.
QUESTIONER_0: That's what Brexit allows us to do.
QUESTIONER_0: Jeremy Corbyn, your answer to the question, forgive me, how will we be better off from Brexit, you're asked.
QUESTIONER_0: if you have your deal and you go to a referendum and it passes and we do leave?
CORBYN: Because we will make sure that our jobs and our manufacturing industries are able to continue trading.
CORBYN: Over half of our trade is with Europe at the present time.
CORBYN: Walk away from that.
CORBYN: put up a barrier on that, then you've got real problems for manufacturing industry jobs all across the country.
CORBYN: Many jobs have already been lost because of the uncertainty surrounding all this.
CORBYN: We have to deal with this within six months.
CORBYN: The Prime Minister's suggestions of a trade deal with the USA, which will take at least, in their estimation, seven years to negotiate, means seven years of complete uncertainty and continued job losses in manufacturing industry.
QUESTIONER_0: when you've been asked by Boris Johnson, I want to give you the chance to ask him why you won't say where you stand on Brexit.
QUESTIONER_0: Is it that you don't know what you think about Brexit or that you do know but you won't tell people?
CORBYN: It's because I think the country has to come together and cannot keep on negotiating and arguing with itself about 48 versus 52.
CORBYN: It has to be
CORBYN: agreement we can reach with the EU that is credible and would maintain that trade relationship but would be outside of EU membership or full membership of the EU.
CORBYN: That is a way of bringing people together and a government that implements that decision whatever it is.
JOHNSON: You cannot end the uncertainty.
JOHNSON: You cannot end the uncertainty on Brexit if you don't know what the deal is that you want to do.
JOHNSON: I negotiated our deal.
JOHNSON: You cannot negotiate a deal if you're neutral on it.
JOHNSON: It's absolutely inconceivable.
JOHNSON: And I think it is, I'm afraid to say, a failure of leadership not to have a position on the greatest issue facing this country at the moment.
JOHNSON: Thank you very much.
JOHNSON: You cannot get a good deal for this country if you don't believe it.
JOHNSON: We want to move on.
JOHNSON: I get to understand how Mr Corbyn proposes to negotiate
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you.
QUESTIONER_0: Well, you put that to him and he's had the chance to respond.
QUESTIONER_0: So, let's move on to the National Health Service, another crucial issue.
QUESTIONER_0: We've got a question from Faith Zaloumis.
QUESTIONER_0: Faith Zaloumis, please.
QUESTIONER_4: Thank you.
QUESTIONER_4: I am returning to my nursing studies next April.
QUESTIONER_4: It costs a lot to train as a nurse, but the starting salaries are low.
QUESTIONER_4: How would you deal with the shortage of nurses and ensure the NHS can retain them?
QUESTIONER_0: So, Faith, who is a student nurse, says, how would you deal with the shortage of nurses?
QUESTIONER_0: and ensure that the NHS can retain them.
QUESTIONER_0: Boris Johnson.
JOHNSON: Thank you very much for what you're doing and I believe passionately we need more nurses in the NHS.
JOHNSON: I've been in power in office for about 130 days and everything I've seen convinced me this is now the time to invest massively in our NHS.
JOHNSON: So what we're doing is putting in the biggest cash boost, £34 billion more,
JOHNSON: 50,000 more nurses, and I should unpack that figure if people complain about it, but it means retaining the 19,000 who might otherwise drop out of the service and then recruiting another 31,000 new nurses, plus we're bringing back the £5,000 bursary.
JOHNSON: One thing that we're doing that I think is sensible and that our Australian-style points-based system allows us to do
JOHNSON: is to encourage nurses from overseas to come to fill some of the gaps by shortening the time for their visa application.
JOHNSON: Now, what I think is totally incomprehensible is to have a system where you try to get more nurses and more staff into the NHS and simultaneously ask the whole of the public sector to work a four-day week.
JOHNSON: Thank you very much.
JOHNSON: That would be bad for patients and bad for the NHS.
QUESTIONER_0: Jeremy Corbyn, just to remind you of the question, how would you deal with the shortage of nurses and ensure the NHS can retain them?
CORBYN: There are 43,000 nurse vacancies at the present time.
CORBYN: It was a Conservative government that cut the nurse bursary.
CORBYN: It was a Conservative and Liberal Democrat coalition that increased student fees to £9,000 a year.
CORBYN: That is a major contributory factor to the stress levels that exist within our NHS.
CORBYN: It is a breaking point, it is a crisis point.
CORBYN: Go to any A&E department and you'll see that straight away.
CORBYN: So what we'd do...
CORBYN: is end university fees, which will mean more people go into studying.
CORBYN: What we will do is return the nurse bursary, probably on a more generous scale than it was in the past.
CORBYN: And we will recruit as rapidly as we possibly can.
CORBYN: But crucially, we will fund the NHS properly.
CORBYN: £40 billion in total will go into the NHS in order to fund it properly.
CORBYN: And that has to be done.
CORBYN: The Prime Minister, the day after he was appointed, announced there was going to be 40 new hospitals.
CORBYN: A week later, that became 20.
CORBYN: A bit later on, it became six new hospitals.
CORBYN: He seems to have a problem with the figures about hospital building in Britain.
JOHNSON: Perhaps I could elucidate, Mr Corbyn, who has a problem with coming up with his Brexit policy, but the reality is...
JOHNSON: We have a very clear agenda, which is to upgrade 20 hospitals to build 40 new ones.
JOHNSON: It's perfectly true that the cash allocation for the whole hospital build is for six initially, but we're putting in the seed funding now so that they can do the architect's drawings, do the plans, do all the business case, so that in 10 years' time, as a result of the decisions taken just in the last 130 days by this government, there will be 40 new hospitals in this country.
CORBYN: Well, what's wrong with that is, 12 hours or 15 hours after being appointed Prime Minister, he came to Parliament and grandly announced there was 40 new hospitals.
CORBYN: It turned out there weren't.
CORBYN: That's when he was asked where they were going to be.
CORBYN: That was then reduced to 20, and then it became seed funding for six.
CORBYN: It's not credible to make those kind of statements and not be able to back it up with any serious plan.
QUESTIONER_0: Is it credible, Mr Corbyn, Mr Johnson asked you a second ago, is it credible to say you'll deal with nursing shortages
QUESTIONER_0: while agreeing to a four-day week, which will surely make the shortages worse.
CORBYN: What we have said is that we want to see the working week come down.
CORBYN: The average working week across the country is 38 hours.
CORBYN: How many days?
CORBYN: And we achieve bringing it down by improved productivity, industries and services.
CORBYN: There is no plan to bring in a four-day week in the NHS, but there is a plan to properly invest in our NHS because I am fed up with seeing people queuing and waiting and being in desperate straits trying to get an appointment to see a GP or to go into hospital.
JOHNSON: and John McDonnell said very clearly that there was a plan for a four-day working week and it's not clear why Mr Corbyn has resolved from that tonight.
JOHNSON: But what I will say is that we will invest massively in the NHS.
JOHNSON: This is a new government, it's a very ambitious government.
JOHNSON: I want to
JOHNSON: see more funding going into our public services.
JOHNSON: We're levelling up funding of education in schools around the country.
JOHNSON: 20,000 more police.
JOHNSON: But we can only do that by having a strong economy.
JOHNSON: And the only way...
JOHNSON: I mean, you're not going to like this, Nick, but the only way we can have a strong economy is if we move this country forward and get Brexit done.
JOHNSON: And I'll just remind you of one... One favourite word.
JOHNSON: ..one report that came out the other day.
JOHNSON: There is £150 billion worth of investment waiting to come into this country if we can get my deal across the line.
JOHNSON: I am keeping a very close eye on the time.
CORBYN: Corbyn needs to catch up.
CORBYN: The Conservatives and Liberal Democrats passed the Health and Social Care Act after 2010 and that has led to £10 billion of private sector involvement in the NHS, with often different wage structures and a difficulty in management.
CORBYN: Labour will
CORBYN: end privatisation with the NHS and return it to what it was always intended to be, a fully funded, fully functioning public health service in this country.
QUESTIONER_0: You will end privatisation you say?
QUESTIONER_0: Are you still claiming that the NHS is up for sale because your document doesn't seem to show any such thing?
CORBYN: Well, read the documents that were discussed in secret and the government refused to release them between themselves and the US administration about access to public services and the extension of the life of patents on medicines which would increase medicine costs in this country.
CORBYN: Trump has said many times, people pay too little for US medicines around the world.
CORBYN: That is the kind of agenda the Prime Minister wants to get involved with.
CORBYN: That is the kind of deal they are trying to make with the US.
JOHNSON: I have to say, this is pure Bermuda Triangle stuff.
JOHNSON: We have heard it time and time again from the Labour Party during this election campaign.
JOHNSON: We will be hearing about little green men next.
JOHNSON: I believe very passionately in a...
JOHNSON: I use the NHS.
JOHNSON: I love it.
JOHNSON: It's one of the most incredible things about this country.
JOHNSON: It is admired around the world.
JOHNSON: The central idea that if any of us get sick, all of us take care of them.
JOHNSON: It's a fantastic thing.
JOHNSON: Now, we believe in an NHS free at the point of use, and under no circumstances will we sell it off to anybody in any kind of trade deal.
QUESTIONER_0: I would just remind... You don't dispute, though, Mr Johnson, you don't dispute what he's quoted, which is that American trade negotiators say they want...
QUESTIONER_0: more access to the NHS.
JOHNSON: I have made it absolutely clear to everybody that under no circumstances will that happen.
JOHNSON: The biggest privatisation of the NHS, of course, took place under the last Labour government, which put in the ruinous PFI
JOHNSON: I have gone round many hospitals talking to fantastic staff and management there who are bearing the burden of that debt.
JOHNSON: We will now have to deal with it.
CORBYN: Your party opposed the formation of the NHS in the first place.
CORBYN: It is factually so, but the more important thing is that your party has presided over cuts in our NHS, increased waiting times and waiting lists, a record number of people delayed in getting appointments and a social care system that is in crisis.
JOHNSON: There are 17,000 more nurses now than there were under the Labour Party.
JOHNSON: And that's because we've had a strong economy that's enabled us to make investments.
JOHNSON: And we are now going to step those investments up, because we believe passionately in the NHS.
JOHNSON: And the way to take this country forward, the way to get it moving, is to get rid of the blockade in Parliament, get Brexit done, and move on.
JOHNSON: There are 43,000... Jeremy Corbyn... Let me just ask you, Mr Corbyn...
QUESTIONER_0: There are 43,000 nurse vacancies.
QUESTIONER_0: That's the fact.
QUESTIONER_0: Understood.
QUESTIONER_0: Now, you sent an email on behalf of the Labour Party saying, imagine opening a five-figure bill for your cancer treatment.
QUESTIONER_0: Do you accept that that is totally misleading?
QUESTIONER_0: There is no possibility of anybody having NHS cancer treatment and having to pay a five-figure bill?
CORBYN: If you end up with a privatised service, that's what you get.
CORBYN: If you end up with that US trade deal, that is what you get.
CORBYN: Now, the Prime Minister says he's not going to do that sort of a trade deal.
CORBYN: If that's the case, why did the talks go on for two years?
CORBYN: It doesn't take two years to say no to privatisation of the NHS.
CORBYN: OK, thank you, gentlemen.
CORBYN: Thank you very much indeed.
CORBYN: Thank you very much indeed.
QUESTIONER_0: We've got lots and lots of questions to get through.
QUESTIONER_0: I want to give you the chance to move on.
QUESTIONER_0: Now, because we've had lots of questions, one or two we're going to make rather quicker than the rest.
QUESTIONER_0: I'll come to one of those in just a second.
QUESTIONER_0: You can join in this debate, of course.
QUESTIONER_0: Hashtag BBC debate on social media.
QUESTIONER_0: And before we return to one of our longer questions, we've got an interesting question here from Phil Wason, who has written in, can't be here tonight, which has the better track record
QUESTIONER_0: of raising the living standards of the poor, socialism or capitalism?
CORBYN: Jeremy Corbyn.
CORBYN: Socialism carried out in a democratic way in this country, in Scandinavia and other places, has raised the living standards of the very poorest.
CORBYN: And it was the post-war Labour government that did massively to improve the living standards of the poorest working-class communities in this country.
CORBYN: And our Labour government will do the same again.
JOHNSON: And I would say that it is one nation conservatism which understands the vital importance of a dynamic market economy as the only way in which you can pay for fantastic public services and for looking after the poorest and neediest in our society.
JOHNSON: That is the balance and symmetry at the heart of what I'm trying to achieve with this government.
JOHNSON: and I think that to attack capitalism, as Mr Corbyn and Mr Macdonald do, is absolutely senseless.
JOHNSON: And by the way, to continue to attack all free trade is, I also think, ignorant of the fact... Just to be clear, Mr Johnson, you think he wants to destroy capitalism?
JOHNSON: Is that your view?
JOHNSON: Well, John Macdonald, who is the Shadow Chancellor, and some would say the intellectual driving force behind...
JOHNSON: this type of polio socialism is committed, he says, to fomenting the overthrow of capitalism.
JOHNSON: I think that is a mistake.
JOHNSON: I don't think that's the right way forward for our country.
JOHNSON: I believe in supporting businesses.
JOHNSON: I believe in cutting... Let him respond.
CORBYN: My kind of socialism is one where you don't leave people behind.
CORBYN: You don't ignore the fact that four million of our children are living in poverty.
CORBYN: You don't ignore the fact that there are thousands of people sleeping on the streets of this country, the fifth richest country in the world.
CORBYN: The inequality has got worse.
CORBYN: 150 billionaires in Britain, more people poor than ever.
CORBYN: Jeremy Corbyn, thank you.
QUESTIONER_0: That cannot be right.
QUESTIONER_0: We're going to turn on to a broader question.
QUESTIONER_0: We're moving on to a broader question about the economy, so both of the leaders will have the chance to talk at greater length.
QUESTIONER_0: Andrew Brooke has our next question.
QUESTIONER_0: Andrew Brooke, please.
QUESTIONER_5: Thank you.
QUESTIONER_5: Both of you say that if you're asked to form a government next week, you will spend, spend, spend, making your plans, your expenditure plans, that is, seem like a fantasy.
QUESTIONER_5: How are we really going to pay for everything that you are promising?
QUESTIONER_0: Andrew Brock, thank you very much indeed.
QUESTIONER_0: Spend, spend, spend, he says you're both going to do, gentlemen.
QUESTIONER_0: He wants to know how both of you are going to pay
QUESTIONER_0: or rather how we're going to pay for your plans.
JOHNSON: Boris Johnson.
JOHNSON: Andrew, thank you very much.
JOHNSON: And we will certainly be making some big investments in, as I say, in the NHS, in putting more police on the streets, in lifting up our education funding for every school in the country.
JOHNSON: We're going to continue with that.
JOHNSON: But what we won't do is borrow hugely to fund day-to-day investment.
JOHNSON: And that is the mistake that the Labour Party would make.
JOHNSON: They would rack up
JOHNSON: are debts, they would put up spending to 1.2 trillion.
JOHNSON: To answer your question, what that would mean is a tax burden of £2,400 per taxpayer.
JOHNSON: You hear from Labour sometimes that the burden is...
JOHNSON: I think Mr Corbyn said it just now, the burden is going to fall only on the 150 billionaires or the top 5%.
JOHNSON: Actually, people on as little as £20,000 a year under their plans will be paying £1,000 a year more in tax.
QUESTIONER_0: Jeremy Corbyn, he says the people who are not rich will pay for your plans.
CORBYN: We're very clear about that and we are the only party that's produced a fully costed manifesto with a grey book that adds up to every piece of expenditure we want.
CORBYN: The problem with this country is we've gone too far down the road.
CORBYN: of free market economics.
CORBYN: We've created too much inequality.
CORBYN: And if every single bit of our manifesto was carried out tomorrow, we would just about reach the level of the public services of France or Germany.
CORBYN: That is how far backwards we've gone.
CORBYN: There has to be investment in our schools.
CORBYN: Why are so many children in oversized classes?
CORBYN: Why are so many children growing up in insecure housing because there isn't the sufficiency of council housing available?
CORBYN: Why are there so many people waiting for social care?
CORBYN: Why do so many people in middle age have to go into debt to pay for their kids to go through university and the social care that their older parents need?
CORBYN: It's simply time to invest in our future.
JOHNSON: Thank you, Boris Johnson.
JOHNSON: And I agree.
JOHNSON: and I agree, but the difference between Mr Corbyn and myself is that his plans, and as I say, we will be making substantial investments within the fiscal headroom that we have, but whilst bearing down on our debt over the life of the Parliament, but what we won't do is rack up such debts that the markets demand a higher interest rate and you end up with huge tax burdens falling on everybody else.
JOHNSON: Labour always ends their time in office with an economic crisis.
JOHNSON: Corbyn and McDonnell
JOHNSON: Corbyn and McDonnell would start their time in office with an economic crisis.
QUESTIONER_0: Mr Corbyn, he says that all of us will pay more in our taxes, not just the rich.
QUESTIONER_0: And independent think tanks like the Institute of Fiscal Studies agree.
QUESTIONER_0: That's what they say.
CORBYN: They don't agree with that point, actually.
QUESTIONER_0: Clearly not true, they said, of your claim that only the top 5% of earners would pay more.
CORBYN: They questioned some aspects of our programme, and we're happy to discuss that with them.
CORBYN: But we are the party that actually produced the funding of it.
CORBYN: The Conservative Party have produced nothing in the way of how they're going to pay for anything they suggest they're doing, other than tax cuts.
CORBYN: It's very hard to see how you can expand services if you're cutting the income base of government in the first place.
CORBYN: It's a fair question, isn't it?
CORBYN: There has to be investment to deal with the inequalities within our society.
JOHNSON: How do you pretend to cut taxes and pay for more, Mr Johnson?
JOHNSON: Because Labour didn't produce the funding for anything.
JOHNSON: I'm afraid it's the hard work of the British people and it's British companies, it's British businesses, large and small, that produce the funding that pays for our National Health Service and everything else.
JOHNSON: And we're a government that understands that if you're going to have a dynamic market economy, you cannot clobber them.
JOHNSON: You cannot clobber companies with the highest taxes in Europe, which is what Mr Corbyn and the Labour Party would do.
JOHNSON: It would be entirely wrong for this country to go down the route that they are proposing.
JOHNSON: I quoted the IFS ad, Mr Corbyn.
QUESTIONER_0: Let me quote them at you.
QUESTIONER_0: He says, your prospectus, say the Institute of Fiscal Studies, top economic think tank, your prospectus, they say, is not credible.
QUESTIONER_0: They say, you haven't said how you'll pay for social care, you haven't said how you'll pay for future tax.
QUESTIONER_0: That's not credible, they say.
JOHNSON: Well, on the contrary, our programme is fully costed, it's there in the manifesto, and it's a great, great programme.
JOHNSON: And the one other advantage that we have, apart from not wrecking the economy and not having a fiscal meltdown, which is what Labour always do, putting up taxes for everybody, we would get our country moving forwards again by getting Brexit done.
JOHNSON: And the economic drag anchor
JOHNSON: of Brexit on this country should not be underestimated.
JOHNSON: It is stopping investment.
JOHNSON: It means that people are uncertain about making purchases, about taking on new jobs.
CORBYN: What Conservative governments always do is look after the very richest within our society.
CORBYN: They've done very, very well in the years of austerity, while it's communities all over the country that have paid for it with closed libraries, closed swimming pools, out of reach pricing on sports facilities, lack of housing, increased stress, increased mental health stress.
CORBYN: We have to redress the imbalances within our society.
CORBYN: And our tax proposals
CORBYN: for corporation tax would be to raise it to 26% at the end of the first period of that Labour government, which would actually be lower than it was in 2010, lower than it is in France, lower than it is in the USA.
CORBYN: What we're proposing is a serious set of plans in order to start addressing the imbalances within our society.
CORBYN: I think it's important to do that.
QUESTIONER_0: His claim is basically that Labour would just bring us into line with many countries around the world and Western Europe.
JOHNSON: I think it is quite incredible that Mr Corbyn should claim that people on £20,000 a year are amongst the richest in society and therefore deserve to be clobbered by his tax increases.
JOHNSON: I think that is totally wrong.
JOHNSON: The burden of taxation always falls most heavily on those on modest and low incomes.
JOHNSON: That is what will happen if Labour are allowed to get in.
JOHNSON: If we have
JOHNSON: We have a Corbyn-Sturgeon coalition.
JOHNSON: I'm afraid it will lead to an economic disaster and, worse still, it will lead to the political stalemate, the frustration for business that wants to get on, the uncertainty of not knowing what the position on Brexit is.
JOHNSON: And we still haven't heard from Mr Corbyn, this debate has now been running for 35 minutes, whether he's in favour of the deal that he was about to do and how he would negotiate it.
CORBYN: I still don't know.
CORBYN: You know what the business organisations tell me is?
CORBYN: They can't stand the uncertainty of this government.
CORBYN: They can't stand the idea of a no-deal exit.
CORBYN: They want to make sure they're able to continue that trade and continue that just-in-time delivery system that is so important in manufacturing industry.
CORBYN: And they are constantly concerned at the lack of understanding of how industry works from a Conservative government that claims to be in support of those industries.
QUESTIONER_0: What he said to you, Mr Corbyn, I want to give you the chance to answer it, is that businesses, even ones that were in favour of Remain, want certainty, they want clarity, they want to get it done.
QUESTIONER_0: What's your answer to him?
CORBYN: With us, you will get a deal which would be leave, but leave with a trade arrangement.
CORBYN: Or you get remain, which will obviously carry on the current situation.
CORBYN: But they would have the certainty of knowing what the trade relationship is, where the investment is going to come from, and where the market is for the goods that are made in this country.
CORBYN: It's kind of important to know those things.
CORBYN: Thank you very much, gentlemen.
CORBYN: Very briefly.
JOHNSON: Very briefly.
JOHNSON: I think it is important to know those things, but it's absolutely unclear what that deal would be, what Mr Corbyn proposes to leave, and who in his party proposes to campaign for the deal he's going to do.
JOHNSON: Thank you.
QUESTIONER_0: You've made that point very well earlier on.
QUESTIONER_0: Let's turn to another question now, a very important subject, given the events of recent days, the issue of security.
QUESTIONER_0: And the question comes from Richard Boustred.
QUESTIONER_0: Mr Boustred, please.
QUESTIONER_6: Your most important responsibility, if you become Prime Minister in a week's time, will be to keep us safe.
QUESTIONER_6: Given the terror attacks we've seen on the streets of London, are you prepared to put public safety ahead of human rights?
QUESTIONER_6: Jeremy Corbyn, will you put public safety ahead of human rights, Mr Basterdas?
CORBYN: It is not an either or.
CORBYN: You have to keep the public safe, you have to ensure that the police are there and properly funded, you have to ensure the prison system works and is effective, that the parole board works and is effective, that the probation service works and is effective.
CORBYN: You have to give people that security.
CORBYN: You don't get security on the cheap, you have to invest in it.
CORBYN: Human rights
CORBYN: are our defence against autocracy and our defence against abuse of power.
CORBYN: There is no difference between wanting security and human rights.
CORBYN: The two things are actually inextricably linked together.
JOHNSON: Boris Johnson?
JOHNSON: I see absolutely no reason to compromise people's human rights, such as the perpetrator of the atrocious killings at London Bridge, but I do think that it was extraordinary and wrong that he should be out on early release and automatic.
JOHNSON: early release.
JOHNSON: I said long before I became Prime Minister that we needed to campaign against short sentences.
JOHNSON: I said in August that we should get rid of automatic early release.
JOHNSON: I have been very sad to see this guy out on the streets able to do what he did.
JOHNSON: We have a bill
JOHNSON: waiting to go, stuck because of the blockade in Parliament, if we can get a working majority, we can get rid of automatic early release and make sure for serious sexual and violent offenders, and make sure that terrorists, people who are convicted of terrorist offences, serve their full sentence.
JOHNSON: I think that is what this country would expect.
QUESTIONER_0: What is wrong, Mr Corbyn, with the idea... Just put that point to him and they'll come back to you.
QUESTIONER_0: What is wrong with the idea that Boris Johnson spells out there that terrorists, particularly terrorists, should serve their full sentence?
CORBYN: You have to run a prison system and a judicial system in a proper way.
CORBYN: You have to have a prison system that works.
CORBYN: One day, pretty well all prisoners are going to come out at some point.
CORBYN: But if you don't run a prison system that includes rehabilitation,
CORBYN: and you don't have a proper assessment of people before they're given any form of early release and a proper review of those cases, then there's obviously a danger to all of us.
CORBYN: And so what happened on the streets of London was utterly appalling.
CORBYN: And I was very moved by what
CORBYN: Jack Merritt's father said about what his son was trying to do, that he wanted a society where you did address the huge problems where somebody committed awful acts like that.
CORBYN: Yes, of course, you must imprison them.
CORBYN: Yes, of course, you must try and rehabilitate them if you can.
CORBYN: But there has to be a monitoring process to achieve that.
CORBYN: We need the security on our streets.
CORBYN: Security doesn't come on the cheap.
CORBYN: And if you cut the number of police officers, cut the number of PCSOs, privatise the probation service, underfund all the other aspects of the criminal justice system, then we all pay a price with our own security.
QUESTIONER_0: Mr Johnson, will you deal first of all, please?
QUESTIONER_0: Jack Merritt's father did say that Jack lived and in the end died for a society in which, quotes, where we do not lock up and throw away the key.
QUESTIONER_0: I know.
QUESTIONER_0: where we focus on rehabilitation, he said, and not revenge.
QUESTIONER_0: Of course.
JOHNSON: And, look, I have huge sympathy for Mr Merritt and the relatives, the families of both victims.
JOHNSON: And it was an absolutely terrible thing.
JOHNSON: But I still think it's wrong that somebody like Usman Khan, who was sentenced to 21 years or 16 years plus five on licence, should have been out automatically
JOHNSON: on eight years, after eight years, when the judge, when he was first convicted, made it clear that he was a very serious jihadi and a risk to public safety.
JOHNSON: And under our government, under my government, of course we won't want to be compromising people's human rights.
JOHNSON: Of course we won't, but we must put public safety first.
JOHNSON: It was the courts that quashed that, wasn't it?
JOHNSON: Automatic early release in such cases is, I think, completely unreasonable and we will get rid of it.
QUESTIONER_0: Could you address Mr Corbyn's point, though, that you have decimated
QUESTIONER_0: the probation service, the prison service as well, many thousands fewer prison officers, and the probation service as well, as well as police officers, during the era of austerity.
JOHNSON: But Nick, just on a small point of fact, there was no parole or probation involved in this, he was released automatically, but your point, and there was
JOHNSON: nothing that any parole board or probation officer could do about that.
JOHNSON: That was the nature of the sentence.
JOHNSON: But there is a valid question about how now we make sure that we have a criminal justice system that protects everybody and delivers justice.
JOHNSON: Are we going to get a rare moment of agreement?
JOHNSON: You may be agreeing on this.
JOHNSON: We are putting a huge amount of cash into our criminal justice system.
JOHNSON: I do believe that it should run smoothly.
JOHNSON: And we're putting another £2.5 billion into our prison system.
JOHNSON: You can only do that if you have a strong economy.
CORBYN: We have seriously overcrowded prisons.
CORBYN: We've lost a lot of prison officers.
CORBYN: And when a prison is overcrowded and there's a shortage of officers, the first thing that goes is education, the next thing that goes is rehabilitation, the next thing that goes is medical support and so on.
CORBYN: So you end up with a breeding ground for all the horrors of the future.
CORBYN: If we go down that road, we all pay a price.
CORBYN: So I'm simply saying this, let's invest in our prison system, invest in rehabilitation, invest crucially in a probation service that works.
CORBYN: It was privatised by this government and we're saying it should be completely in public ownership.
QUESTIONER_0: I just want to make sure you're answering a point he made.
QUESTIONER_0: Mr Johnson said to you, in this particular case,
QUESTIONER_0: It was not about resource.
QUESTIONER_0: It was not about the Parole Board or probation, he says.
QUESTIONER_0: It was about sentences.
QUESTIONER_0: And you're opposed to the change he wants to make.
CORBYN: What I've said is there should be a review of the individual prisoner before release is countenance.
CORBYN: That, I think, is absolutely clear.
CORBYN: And that's why I asked for a role for both the parole board as well as the probation service in this.
CORBYN: Because, listen, what happened was unbelievably appalling.
CORBYN: And, therefore, we have to keep people safe and secure.
CORBYN: But you don't do that by under-investing in rehabilitation programmes as well for all prisoners.
JOHNSON: Boris Johnson, with great respect,
JOHNSON: Mr Corbyn, throughout his career, has consistently opposed longer sentences.
JOHNSON: When you look at MI5, the body that keeps us safe, particularly from terror attacks, he is proposing to put in a Home Secretary in the form of Diane Abbott, who has called for MI5 to be disbanded.
JOHNSON: Mr Corbyn, with great respect to him, when you look at the
JOHNSON: huge issues of safety on public streets, knife crime.
JOHNSON: You have a Labour Party that is adamantly sceptical, opposed to stop and search, which I believe is an integral part of fighting crime on our streets.
JOHNSON: We're not only going to put 20,000 more officers on the streets of London, we're going to fight the streets of this country, we're going to fight crime in the way that I did in London, but we're going to back the police up.
JOHNSON: Let's get your response to that.
CORBYN: This is from the government that cut the police force by such massive numbers, privatised our probation service and got rid of all of our PCSOs in many parts of the country.
QUESTIONER_0: Forgive me, Mr Corbyn, you've made the point about cuts.
QUESTIONER_0: His point to you is that your Home Secretary, Diane Abbott,
QUESTIONER_0: wants to, he claims, you tell us, wanted in the past at least to disband MI5.
CORBYN: There are no plans whatsoever to disband MI5 or any other part of the security services.
CORBYN: There are plans to invest properly in our police and security services.
CORBYN: And when you live and represent an area like mine,
CORBYN: where somebody was murdered on the streets by a far-right terrorist attack on an individual, you realise how horrific that is for the community and how dangerous that is for all of us.
CORBYN: Yes, we do need to invest in all of our services, and that will help to make us all a lot safer.
QUESTIONER_0: Gentlemen, thank you very much indeed.
QUESTIONER_0: Let us move on now to Toby Mayhew, who has a question for us.
QUESTIONER_0: Toby Mayhew, please.
QUESTIONER_3: From accusations of Islamophobia and anti-Semitism in major parties to threats made against female MPs, what would you do to get the hate out of politics?
QUESTIONER_0: What would you do to get the hate out of politics?
QUESTIONER_0: Toby Mayhew has, and he mentions Islamophobia, anti-Semitism and the threat against female MPs.
QUESTIONER_0: Boris Johnson, I'm going to ask both you leaders to address problems in your own parties to begin with.
QUESTIONER_0: Of course, you may want to make
QUESTIONER_0: about other parties?
JOHNSON: I think you are making a very important point and everybody feels it at the moment.
JOHNSON: This is a very rough time in politics.
JOHNSON: There is a lot of feeling at the moment.
JOHNSON: I think on prejudice, Islamophobia, anti-Semitism, what we are doing in our party is having an independent inquiry into anybody who is guilty of any such offence.
JOHNSON: They are out first bounce if they are guilty.
JOHNSON: When it comes to
JOHNSON: the protection, particularly of female MPs and women in politics.
JOHNSON: It is vital that we give them the security that they need and we are doing a huge amount in the House of Commons to deliver that.
JOHNSON: What we need to do is we need to come together as a country.
JOHNSON: We've been going at this for too long.
JOHNSON: And one of the things, and I'm afraid this is my key point tonight, the scratchiness of politics, the bitterness, the acrimony is a function of our inability to get Brexit done.
JOHNSON: Understood.
JOHNSON: But on this specific point of Islamophobia that we have... We have a plan to get Brexit done.
JOHNSON: We can do it and we will.
JOHNSON: And we can be out on January 31st and end what I think is misery for the country.
QUESTIONER_0: On the specific point about Islamophobia, and then I'm going to turn to Mr Corbyn on anti-Semitism.
QUESTIONER_0: You say people come out at first bounce, but you have candidates who have retweeted Tommy Robinson talking about, quotes, Muslim paedophiles.
QUESTIONER_0: And a former chair of the Conservative Party says we have a serious and deep problem with Islamophobia.
JOHNSON: Sorry.
JOHNSON: Please.
JOHNSON: Very quickly, all those candidates have either apologised or are now subject to investigation.
JOHNSON: And, you know, I don't want to unnecessarily draw comparisons with the Labour Party, but I do think it extraordinary that in this election we've heard for the first time in history the Chief Rabbi say that he fears for his community in this country were Mr Corbyn to be elected.
JOHNSON: And I think it's a quite extraordinary state of affairs.
QUESTIONER_0: Jeremy Corbyn, it is extraordinary, isn't it, that the leader of a religious community has to warn people about you and your party?
CORBYN: Anti-Semitism is wrong and totally unacceptable in our society, in our parties, in our political life, and the history of the awful treatment of the Jewish people in the 19th century in Germany indicates exactly where that kind of language and that kind of racism leads us to.
CORBYN: There is no place for it whatsoever anywhere in our party or our society, and there never will be, as far as I'm concerned.
QUESTIONER_0: You see, what Jewish members of the Labour Party say is, if this was black or Asian people who are victims of racism, you would listen to them.
QUESTIONER_0: But when Jews say that your party under your leadership is infected with anti-Jewish hatred, you say, no, no, I know better.
CORBYN: I don't know better than anybody.
CORBYN: I listen to people and amend, if necessary, the rules and processes.
CORBYN: I'm the leader that introduced an investigation process, introduced a disciplinary process, introduced a process of education, introduced a process for dealing with egregious cases.
CORBYN: And, yes, we have suspended or expelled members where we have found them guilty of anti-Semitic behaviour, as, indeed, other parties have done the same.
CORBYN: But there are problems of Islamophobia within our society also, as you quite rightly
CORBYN: draw attention to, and there are problems of language that is used.
CORBYN: I do not ever use racist language in any form to describe anybody in this world or in our society.
CORBYN: Let's be clear, you're saying that he does.
CORBYN: We need a world where we treat people with respect.
QUESTIONER_0: You're saying that he does.
QUESTIONER_0: I think he's clearly saying, Mr Johnson, if you want to reply, that he thinks you have used racist language.
JOHNSON: I missed that, but let me respond by saying that I think that Mr Corbyn, I'm sure, is very well-intentioned, but I think that in his handling of this particular issue, his unwillingness to take a stand, to stand up for Jewish people in the Labour Party, his unwillingness to protect them, to put an arm round them,
JOHNSON: Is it, in my view, a failure of leadership?
JOHNSON: You cannot be neutral on questions like this any more, in my view, than you can try to lead this country and be neutral on the issue of Brexit.
JOHNSON: And it is a failure to take a stand, to have a point of view that, in the end, will cost this country gravely and deeply.
JOHNSON: And I don't want to waste another year, next year and more, in vacillation
JOHNSON: and confusion about what sort of position Mr Corbyn is willing to take, what sort of leadership he's willing to... A failure of leadership is when you use racist remarks to describe people in different countries or in our society.
CORBYN: I will never do that, and my party will never do that.
QUESTIONER_0: And, Jeremy Corbyn, he makes a point that one way to take hate more generally out of politics, he argues, is to sort this Brexit row out, because it's infecting our politics.
QUESTIONER_0: whatever your view is.
QUESTIONER_0: Brexit, of course... Do you disagree with that?
CORBYN: Of course there has to be a solution to it, but... What's your solution?
CORBYN: Well, I've made that quite clear, actually.
JOHNSON: I'm not sure if you've been...
JOHNSON: But the point... We've been going on for 40 minutes and I don't know what it is.
CORBYN: The point is about the cohesion of our... What is it?
CORBYN: The point is about the cohesion of our society.
CORBYN: I hope the Prime Minister understands the hurt that people feel when they hear remarks and articles that he's written in the past.
CORBYN: I hope he will regret those, and I hope he will understand the importance of all of us using respectful language of all faiths, all religions and all languages in what is a multicultural society which I'm proud to live in.
QUESTIONER_0: Sorry to interrupt, but we've got a couple more questions that we want to get through if we've got time.
QUESTIONER_0: Our next question is from Katrina Haradine, please.
QUESTIONER_0: Katrina Haradine.
QUESTIONER_7: In the era of fake news, what punishment do you think is appropriate for elected politicians who lie during political campaigns?
QUESTIONER_0: What punishment is appropriate for elected politicians who lie during political campaigns?
QUESTIONER_0: Boris Johnson.
JOHNSON: Well, they should be made to go on their knees through the chamber of the House of Commons, scourging themselves with copies of their offending documents, which claim to prove one thing, and actually prove something quite different.
CORBYN: Jeremy Corbyn?
CORBYN: I think it's important when people go into an election campaign, they put forward a policy of what they're going to do.
CORBYN: They put forward a policy of how they're going to pay for it.
CORBYN: And if they don't deliver, then there is a democratic process to deal with that in the future.
CORBYN: That is what democracy is about.
CORBYN: It's about holding people to account.
CORBYN: and holding government to account in Parliament.
CORBYN: And I want to see not a weaker, but a stronger House of Commons in the future that holds our government to account to make sure we deliver on the promises of reducing poverty in Britain.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you.
QUESTIONER_0: Boris Johnson, does it worry you that a leading British diplomat has resigned today, saying that she would no longer want to peddle half-truths on behalf of a government I do not trust?
JOHNSON: Well, I don't know who you're referring to, but what it shows to me is that we need to move on as a country, because there are plenty of people who are irreconcilably opposed to Brexit.
JOHNSON: And I think that actually what we should do is respect the will of the people.
JOHNSON: People talk about trust in politics.
JOHNSON: Look at the promises that were made.
JOHNSON: repeatedly by Mr Corbyn, by all the other parties, that they would honour the referendum result.
JOHNSON: They're refusing to do it.
JOHNSON: Here we stand at this critical moment in our country's history.
JOHNSON: It's our chance on Thursday to honour our democracy and get Brexit done.
CORBYN: Thank you very much indeed.
CORBYN: Thank you.
CORBYN: There has to be a test.
CORBYN: Thank you very much.
CORBYN: There has to be a test on the statements made and so when people paint slogans on the side of a bus that are totally unsustainable, perhaps it's time that we did have an independent monitoring of what goes on.
JOHNSON: If you look at the numbers we put on the side of us, look at the gross figure we pay to the EU, the number is going up.
JOHNSON: And it is one of the advantages of our deal that we will take back control of our money, our borders, our laws, our immigration system.
JOHNSON: It's very, very clear.
JOHNSON: It's there in black and white after 45 minutes.
JOHNSON: We still do not know what Mr Corbyn's deal would be.
JOHNSON: And we still don't know whether he would back it.
JOHNSON: Nor do we know who in his shadow cabinet he is proposing to deploy to negotiate that deal.
JOHNSON: Thank you very much.
JOHNSON: But not a single one of them actually backs it.
JOHNSON: Thank you very much indeed.
QUESTIONER_0: Now, that's all the time we've got for questions now.
QUESTIONER_0: Each leader has got 30 seconds for their closing statement.
QUESTIONER_0: Again, the order was decided by the toss of a coin.
QUESTIONER_0: Boris Johnson chose to go last, so can I ask Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour Party leader, to make your closing statement, Mr Corbyn?
CORBYN: People say that politics doesn't change anything, but it can.
CORBYN: It was a radical Labour government that created our National Health Service and rebuilt Britain.
CORBYN: Today, we must be ambitious on the same scale.
CORBYN: The future really is ours to make together.
CORBYN: We can tackle the climate emergency, end child poverty, and properly fund our National Health Service.
CORBYN: On Thursday, you can choose hope and vote for real change.
CORBYN: Thank you, Mr Corbyn.
JOHNSON: Mr Johnson, your closing statement, please.
JOHNSON: This Thursday we can choose another hung parliament under Mr Corbyn and Nicola Sturgeon with two chaotic referendums or else we can get Brexit done, get out of neutral and get a parliament that works for you and on your priorities.
JOHNSON: The NHS, the cost of living, 20,000 more police, more cash for our schools.
JOHNSON: Let's get it done.
JOHNSON: Let's move on and vote Conservative on Thursday.
JOHNSON: Thank you, Boris Johnson.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you, Jeremy Corbyn.
QUESTIONER_0: Now, the debate is far from over.
QUESTIONER_0: It's raging on social media, hashtag BBC Debate.
