QUESTIONER_0: Before our first question, everyone has a minute to set out their stall.
QUESTIONER_0: The order for that was decided by drawing lots.
QUESTIONER_0: First tonight, the Liberal Democrat leader, Jo Swinson.
SWINSON: Before I start, I want to pay tribute to the bravery of our emergency services, and my thoughts are with everybody affected by this afternoon's horrific terrorist attack.
SWINSON: My dad taught me always to ask questions, to challenge the way things are and work to change them for the better.
SWINSON: And I believe things can be better.
SWINSON: That we can remain in the European Union and have more money to spend on improving your life right now and more to invest in our children's future.
SWINSON: Imagine a country where you are valued for who you are, no matter what God you pray to or none, how much money you have, the colour of your skin or who you love.
SWINSON: where we nurture the bonds in our family of nations, our United Kingdom, where we work with our closest friends to save our planet, where we look after the most vulnerable and our children have the best start in life.
SWINSON: If you share my vision for our country, if you want to stop Brexit and build a brighter future, vote Liberal Democrat.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you.
QUESTIONER_0: Next up is the Green Party's Caroline Lucas.
LUCAS: Tonight, I'm going to correct one big lie and tell one big truth.
LUCAS: First, the big lie, get Brexit done.
LUCAS: Boris Johnson's rotten deal will not get it done.
LUCAS: It's just the start of years more wrangling.
LUCAS: His oven-ready meal is made of chlorinated chicken and it will make us all sick.
LUCAS: And when we turn up at the hospital, we'll find it's been flogged off to Trump's America.
LUCAS: That's why the Green Party supports a people's vote on Brexit and will campaign wholeheartedly to remain.
LUCAS: Now, the big truth.
LUCAS: From the Arctic to the Amazon, the world is on fire.
LUCAS: Scientists say we have just 10 years to stop runaway climate chaos.
LUCAS: This emergency requires us to rise up and to be our best.
LUCAS: An opportunity not just to avert disaster, but through an ambitious Green New Deal to fix Britain for good.
LUCAS: This election is the greatest, perhaps the last, chance to change course.
LUCAS: Children can't vote.
LUCAS: The planet can't vote.
LUCAS: It is up to you.
LUCAS: And I ask you, if not now, when?
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you.
QUESTIONER_0: Next, for Labour, Rebecca Long-Bailey.
LONG-BAILEY: Thank you, Nick, and to everyone watching this debate tonight.
LONG-BAILEY: I'm sure everyone's thoughts are with all those caught up in the horrific incident at London Bridge earlier today, and our thoughts are with the friends and families of those injured and, of course, the two people who we know have tragically died.
LONG-BAILEY: I want to thank the police and emergency services for all they did today and all they do every day to keep us safe, and, of course, the bravery of those members of the public who intervened.
LONG-BAILEY: This election gives you a real choice about the future for you and your family and for our country.
LONG-BAILEY: I want a government that is on your side, not a government that stands by while too many families are struggling to make ends meet, while one and a half million older people don't get the care they need and while we face a climate emergency.
LONG-BAILEY: We can do better.
LONG-BAILEY: Labour will build that fairer Britain that cares for all, that transforms our country, because we are on your side.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you.
QUESTIONER_0: Next, the Conservatives' Rishi Subhak.
SUNAK: Our thoughts are, of course, with all of those tragically affected today.
SUNAK: And I pay tribute to the members of the public and the police for their incredible bravery.
SUNAK: But turning to tonight's debate, everyone in this country is frustrated.
SUNAK: Frustrated that Parliament's been stuck going round in circles on Brexit.
SUNAK: We all want to move on.
SUNAK: And with your support, we can do exactly that.
SUNAK: We have a new Brexit deal ready to go.
SUNAK: We'll bring it back to Parliament before Christmas and leave by the end of January.
SUNAK: And then we can get back to focusing on your priorities, the NHS, schools, cutting crime.
SUNAK: But the only way to make this happen is to elect a Conservative government.
SUNAK: So let's end the delay and get Brexit done.
SUNAK: Because there's so much else that we have to do to unleash the potential of a proud, prosperous and united Britain.
SUNAK: Thank you.
QUESTIONER_0: Now the Leader of Plaid Cymru, Adam Price.
PRICE: Croeso i Gymru, welcome to Wales.
PRICE: We're a country with great potential, rich in talent and resources, held back by poverty.
PRICE: And the greatest poverty of all, perhaps, is the poverty of our leadership.
PRICE: Labour have been in power in this building for 20 years, and for half of that time in Westminster too.
PRICE: We have the lowest wages across these islands, a third of our children living in poverty and the worst A&E waiting times on record.
PRICE: Labour and the Tories, of course, will blame each other, but the truth is neither of them are the solution to our problems.
PRICE: They are our problem source.
PRICE: On Brexit, like everything else, they lie to us or they let us down.
PRICE: We want Wales to remain in the European Union, but one thing we don't want to remain in is poverty.
PRICE: And we don't have to if we start to believe in our own future.
PRICE: The new start we need as a nation, the new investment, the new leadership, the new hope will never come from Westminster.
PRICE: It can only come from us, from all of us that live in Wales and want to see it prosper.
PRICE: Let's make this winter our Welsh spring and find our voice on the 12th of December.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you very much.
QUESTIONER_0: Now for the SNP, the party leader and Scotland's First Minister, Nicola Sturgeon.
STURGEON: My thoughts, too, are with those attacked on London Bridge today and with all those who responded.
STURGEON: This election really matters.
STURGEON: At stake is not just Brexit, but what kind of society we want to be.
STURGEON: The SNP wants Scotland to be an independent, outward-looking, internationalist country, and we want the people of Scotland to have the right to make that choice.
STURGEON: But we also want to play our part in locking Boris Johnson out of Downing Street.
STURGEON: If he wins the majority, then the consequences will be dire.
STURGEON: Brexit will not, in any sense, be done.
STURGEON: Trade talks haven't even started yet.
STURGEON: These issues will cause chaos for years to come.
STURGEON: In his rush for a trade deal with Donald Trump, Johnson simply can't be trusted not to put our NHS on the table.
STURGEON: He also threatens to rip up rules on food standards, environmental protections and workers' rights.
STURGEON: To build a better future, we need to stop all of that.
STURGEON: And in Scotland, that means voting SNP.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you.
QUESTIONER_0: And finally, the chairman of the Brexit Party, Richard Tice.
TICE: Firstly, I just want to share the thoughts that others have expressed about the horrific events in London today.
TICE: But as we look forward, just imagine, with Brexit done properly, we have an amazing future.
TICE: And that's why I am here.
TICE: I want the least well-off to benefit the most, with cheaper fuel, food, clothing, shoes, with wages growing faster than for decades.
TICE: Imagine thousands and thousands of new jobs created where they are most needed, with hundreds of new fishing boats filling our harbours, many built in Britain.
TICE: Imagine £100 billion of new local road and rail projects being built in every region, including the North East, which has been so left behind.
TICE: I want us to be world leaders in training doctors, nurses, carers, world leaders in planting new trees and recycling.
TICE: But we have to restore trust in democracy with major political reforms.
TICE: I'm excited by the future.
TICE: It's time to change politics for good.
TICE: It's time for the Brexit party.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you very much indeed.
QUESTIONER_0: Now, the aim of tonight is to have a lively debate about a whole range of issues which I hope are the ones that are concerning you at home.
QUESTIONER_0: But, of course, our thoughts tonight are particularly on the events in London, so we're going to begin with a question about that from Tony Wilcox, a retired Chief Inspector of Police.
QUESTIONER_0: Mr Wilcox, please.
QUESTIONER_1: Tragically, no amount of extra police officers will prevent terrorist attacks like the one in London today.
QUESTIONER_1: What do the panel members propose to do to tackle security issues in the UK in future?
QUESTIONER_1: Thank you.
QUESTIONER_0: What do you, Rishi Sunak, what do the Conservatives plan to do to tackle security issues in the future?
SUNAK: Well, Mr Wilcox, I was in Parliament just a couple of years ago when the awful incident happened, and I saw firsthand the bravery and ultimately the sacrifice of your colleagues that day.
SUNAK: So I pay enormous tribute and thanks to the work that you and your colleagues do to keep us safe.
SUNAK: And as we reflect on today's events, of course, our thoughts are with all of those who are affected by these awful events.
SUNAK: It's a tragedy and our prayers are with them.
SUNAK: Now, the first duty of every government is to keep us safe.
SUNAK: And, of course, a Conservative government will continue to do that, investing in our police, giving them the resources and the powers that they need to do that job.
SUNAK: And you can rest assured on that.
SUNAK: But today we saw something else.
SUNAK: We saw ordinary members of the public, not the government, ordinary members of the public showing incredible bravery to help intervene and protect their fellow citizens.
SUNAK: They represent absolutely the best of our values.
SUNAK: Rebecca Long-Bailey.
LONG-BAILEY: Well, I think today's event was horrific, and it will alter the lives of people involved forever, not to mention the families who were affected by the two people who were tragically killed.
LONG-BAILEY: And our hearts and our prayers are with them all.
LONG-BAILEY: And of course, as I've already paid tribute to the amazing police for their response and those passersby who intervened.
LONG-BAILEY: But this was an extreme event.
LONG-BAILEY: But we can't ignore that over recent years, certainly the last five years, we've seen increases in violent crime right across the country.
LONG-BAILEY: At the same time, since 2010, we've seen over 20,000 police officers cut from frontline services.
LONG-BAILEY: So it's right to recognise that that would have
LONG-BAILEY: direct impact and of course we've got to invest more in community neighbourhood policing and Labour has pledged to do that, the eyes and ears of our communities, but we've also got to invest in counter-terrorism measures and ensure that they're properly funded as well as ensuring that our defence spending is at the level it should be and we've committed to that 2% NATO target.
LONG-BAILEY: Well, the final message that I'd put to the audience on this is that we do need to have that comprehensive community approach.
LONG-BAILEY: And that doesn't just focus on police and defence spending.
LONG-BAILEY: It's right across social services, probation, education, and reversing the cuts that have happened there so that we can spot any alarming signs when they arise.
QUESTIONER_0: Nicola Sturgeon.
STURGEON: Well, firstly, I want to say again that my thoughts are with everybody affected on London Bridge today with those who sustained injuries and I think in particular the two families this evening who are facing up to the loss of a loved one.
STURGEON: We witnessed today some exceptional acts of
STURGEON: bravery on the part of members of the public and I, like I'm sure all of us are, are full of admiration.
STURGEON: It's how all of us hope we'd respond in a situation like that but in truth none of us know until we're confronted by it and hopefully we will not be in that position.
STURGEON: In terms of what we do, we have to make sure that we support our security services, that we keep access to the best intelligence, which is one of many reasons that I think leaving the European Union is a mistake.
STURGEON: And although the gentleman is right, no amount of police officers can prevent every terrorist attack.
STURGEON: the numbers of police officers is important in ensuring the speed of response we saw from the emergency services today.
STURGEON: The SNP government in Scotland has over the past decade increased and maintained police numbers.
STURGEON: I think it is regrettable that hasn't happened elsewhere in the UK and I hope after this election we will see police officers get the support that they so richly deserve.
SWINSON: Well, I think everybody feels just heartbroken at what we've witnessed today on London Bridge and huge, huge courage shown by those members of the public and the emergency services that should be commended.
SWINSON: I think the other thing that I'm struck by when we face these types of challenges as a country, and we've seen these in London, we saw them a few years ago in Manchester, is the way in which the community pulls together is inspiring, and that gives me real hope about how we come together as a country.
SWINSON: In terms of security we do need to have more police and we've set out plans to increase police numbers by 20,000.
SWINSON: I think it's also important that we look at what the police do and that community policing and one of the threats that many people worry about in their everyday security is how safe they are on the streets and in particular how safe their children are on the streets.
SWINSON: Far too many parents have
SWINSON: had that horrendous call of a young person being stabbed, being another victim of knife crime, and something which in Scotland has worked really, really well.
SWINSON: It started in Glasgow 15 years ago, the Violence Reduction Unit, the police working with public services, with the NHS, with social care, social work, to provide a holistic approach to tackling violence, a public health approach,
SWINSON: It has seen the stabbing rate reduced by two thirds nearly in Glasgow and that is something that we should replicate elsewhere.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you, Adam Bright.
QUESTIONER_2: Yeah, I mean, it's difficult to find the words.
QUESTIONER_2: I can't imagine what the families and the loved ones, those that lost their lives, are going through.
QUESTIONER_2: And, you know, I extend my condolences to them.
QUESTIONER_2: It's an area...
QUESTIONER_2: I live around the corner from Tooley Street.
QUESTIONER_2: It's an area I know very well.
QUESTIONER_2: And, you know...
QUESTIONER_2: What can we do?
QUESTIONER_2: Clearly, there has to be a multiplicity of answers, because no one answer will keep us safe.
PRICE: Absolutely, it is the case that I think resources are always part of the answer.
PRICE: In Wales, in contrast to Scotland, we've seen a 9% reduction in police officers.
PRICE: between 2010 and 2018, we need to reverse that.
PRICE: We're calling for 1,600 additional police officers.
PRICE: A preventative approach, absolutely.
PRICE: It is true, as I think it was the father of Damilola Taylor was saying, knife crime and violence has become normalised
PRICE: in our society, in the sense that we are almost desensitised to it now.
PRICE: And that says something, doesn't it, about where we are.
PRICE: And a preventative approach absolutely, ultimately, is the way to address this, because crime, criminality, radicalisation in the case of terrorism, it has multiple roots, and we have to address them at all of those levels.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you, Adam Price.
QUESTIONER_0: Caroline Lucas and then Richard Tice.
LUCAS: My thoughts are obviously very much with those who were injured, the family and friends of those who were killed.
LUCAS: And as others have said, really, it's impossible to imagine the pain that people are going through right now, particularly London Bridge, a place that was already hit once before as well.
LUCAS: I think we've seen the best of human nature and the worst of human nature, as quite often has happened before, in the sense that, you know, we've seen the bravery of the public, the bravery of our emergency services at the same time as we've seen the utter criminality and hatred of whoever perpetrated this particular attack.
LUCAS: We don't know much about it yet, but I think as political leaders, we all have a responsibility to ensure that incidents like this don't divide us, that I hope we can come together and show real leadership and promote the compassion and love that is more powerful ultimately than hatred.
LUCAS: But on terms of what we should do, Terry talked about the police and he's right that any number of police can't prevent this from happening, but more police numbers would certainly help.
LUCAS: I think we need to look again at the PREVENT program because I think we need to make sure that it is
LUCAS: enjoying as much confidence as every single community in our country as it can, and I'm not sure right now that it is, and I do believe that staying inside the EU would be a better way of ensuring that we have that security information.
QUESTIONER_0: Lots of issues I promise you that we will get the chance to address.
QUESTIONER_0: But finally on this question, and before we move on to our next one, Richard Tice.
TICE: Some great words have been said.
TICE: I mean, utterly, utterly heartbreaking is how all of us must feel.
TICE: It is impossible to imagine, if you receive that phone call, that a loved one, a daughter, a son, a father has been murdered in a terrorist incident.
TICE: Utterly impossible to imagine.
TICE: But we do also have to just recognise the extraordinary bravery, as people have said, of members of the public,
TICE: And I think that does also remind us that all of us, in our daily lives, we have to remain incredibly vigilant.
TICE: Because yes, we must keep investing in more police and more technology.
TICE: But however many police we have, and we need as many of those police as possible on the streets,
TICE: everywhere, in our towns, villages and cities, making us feel safer.
TICE: The more police on the streets, the safer we feel, but we must remain vigilant.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you very much indeed.
QUESTIONER_0: Now, that won't be the pattern for all our questions tonight.
QUESTIONER_0: The whole point of this is a debate, a lively debate, an exchange of views between the politicians.
QUESTIONER_0: I'll ask one or two people to
QUESTIONER_0: start on any question and then give them the opportunity to open up, but I'll make sure that everybody gets to have their say on every question.
QUESTIONER_0: Let's move on to our next question, a vital subject, the subject of the economy.
QUESTIONER_0: Peter Warren from Reading has a question.
QUESTIONER_0: Peter Warren.
QUESTIONER_3: With all the parties promising to spend more money during the campaign, what guarantees can you give that these spending plans will be delivered when you get into government?
QUESTIONER_0: What guarantees can you give that your spending plans will be delivered?
QUESTIONER_0: Rebecca Long-Bailey.
LONG-BAILEY: Well I think we need to look at the reasons as to why we've set up such a radical and transformative manifesto and what I'd say in a nutshell is that our plans deliver a more regionally equal, healthier, better educated, higher investment, higher productivity economy.
LONG-BAILEY: Essentially,
LONG-BAILEY: We want to work for the betterment of the people.
LONG-BAILEY: And the role of the economy is to work to make people's lives better, to increase businesses, to make sure that we are making those investments.
LONG-BAILEY: Well, there's also a very human element to all of this.
LONG-BAILEY: We've got 4.4 million people on waiting lists who can't get operations.
LONG-BAILEY: We've got 8 million people living in poverty in working households.
LONG-BAILEY: So we know the economy isn't working.
LONG-BAILEY: So, there were two strands.
LONG-BAILEY: We need to invest, and we've set out a green industrial revolution, a green transformation fund of £250 billion, a social transformation fund to invest in our public realm and the building capacity of our NHS, our schools and our public services, but also to provide businesses with the support that they need to invest for the long term.
QUESTIONER_0: Rebecca Long-Bailey, just a reminder of the question.
QUESTIONER_0: The question not so much, what are your spending plans?
QUESTIONER_0: The question, what guarantees can you give that your spending plans will be delivered?
QUESTIONER_0: If you come in and then I'm going to go to Rishi.
LONG-BAILEY: Well, I think we've probably outlined the most detailed manifesto of all the parties with a grey book sitting alongside it detailing our costs.
LONG-BAILEY: our tax receipts and how we'll fund those proposals going forward.
LONG-BAILEY: For example, in my brief, I'm transforming our economy through a green industrial revolution.
LONG-BAILEY: We have a report, 30 by 2030, actions that we will take as a Labour government that go into extreme detail.
SUNAK: Let's come now though to Rishi Sunak for the Conservatives.
SUNAK: When we came into office, Labour had left this country on the brink of bankruptcy.
SUNAK: But because of the actions we took, the economy is now stronger.
SUNAK: Millions more people are in work.
SUNAK: Wages are rising.
SUNAK: And we're able to invest again in public services like the NHS, schools and police.
SUNAK: Get on with our plans to make Britain the best place to raise a family, to start a business.
SUNAK: And I can give you this commitment that under the Conservatives, under our fully costed plans, the national debt at the end of the Parliament will be lower.
SUNAK: Now all of that would be put at risk by what we've heard are Labour's absolutely reckless spending plans.
SUNAK: They would wreck the economy, the debt would be higher,
SUNAK: And unlike our plans to cut taxes for the lowest paid, we now know that Labour would raise taxes on millions of ordinary working families up and down this country.
QUESTIONER_0: Rebeccah Lamb Bailey, reckless, he says.
QUESTIONER_0: And the numbers are simple, aren't they?
QUESTIONER_0: His party says they'll spend about £3 billion more.
QUESTIONER_0: You say you'll spend about £83 billion more, which is double what you were promising at the last election.
LONG-BAILEY: I think there's two points I'd like to come back on there.
LONG-BAILEY: I think Rishi talked about Labour crashing the economy.
LONG-BAILEY: We suffered a world banking crisis, and it's important to note that your chancellor was working at Deutsche Bank, selling the very derivatives that caused the banking crash in the first place.
LONG-BAILEY: Secondly, when you talk about reckless spending plans, I think you were referred to recently in the media talking about the figure of 1.2 trillion spends, which is a fabricated lie that the Conservative Party have been perpetrating over the last few weeks.
LONG-BAILEY: We're the only party with a credible and detailed costing plan to outline our plans.
LONG-BAILEY: I haven't seen any costings from your party whatsoever.
SUNAK: Well, let him answer that.
SUNAK: Rishi Sunak, she says you're lying about our plans.
SUNAK: No, our plans are the most detailed and costed plans that have ever been there.
SUNAK: But you look at people like the IFS, respected think tanks, they've described the Labour plans as simply not credible.
SUNAK: They said that they're wholly unprecedented in terms of the scales and the scale of... Nicola Sturgeon?
SUNAK: it on the scale of spending.
SUNAK: But they have also said very clearly it will be ordinary working families that pay the price in higher taxes.
QUESTIONER_0: Nicola Sturgeon, you were trying to get in.
SUNAK: What were you trying to say to the Chief Secretary?
STURGEON: I was pointing out that the IFS said that neither Labour or the Tories' spending plans
STURGEON: We are credible.
STURGEON: Let me be candid, my party is not going to be running the Treasury after this election, but we might hold the balance of power and therefore we will want to see investment in the right priorities, investment in the National Health Service, an end to the welfare cuts that have caused misery.
STURGEON: more investment in the transition to a net zero economy, pension justice, particularly for WASPI women.
STURGEON: And how will we help to ensure that?
STURGEON: We'll bring to bear the experience we have in government.
STURGEON: In Scotland, the SNP has reformed the income tax system, making it more progressive.
STURGEON: Those at the top pay a bit more, those at the bottom pay a bit less.
STURGEON: And we'll also argue that we shouldn't be spending money on the wrong priorities.
STURGEON: Why should we be investing £200 billion in new Trident nuclear weapons, for example?
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you very much.
QUESTIONER_0: Jo Swinson to keep us safe.
STURGEON: Jo Swinson then Richard Duff.
SWINSON: What neither Labour nor the Conservatives are telling you is that their plans don't add up because they both want to leave the European Union and they both know, the government's analysis says and all the respected economic analysis says, that if we leave the European Union
SWINSON: We will be poorer.
SWINSON: There will be less money.
SWINSON: So we won't be able to have these wish lists.
SWINSON: And I have to say Peter you ask such a good question.
SWINSON: You put your finger right on it.
SWINSON: How can you guarantee it.
SWINSON: Because both of them are trying to say that you can have this in the case of labor with somebody else paying for it and the case of the Conservatives saying that taxes won't have to go up.
SWINSON: Do you know, if you're listening to that and you think in your heart of hearts you just know that's not true, then you need to look for parties that are going to set out where they will get the money from and we're saying very honestly we think the NHS needs more money and we're going to raise income tax by a penny in the pound in order to do so.
SWINSON: You have to say where you're going to get the money from.
QUESTIONER_0: Jo Swinson, given that you're being honest with the British public, what does a penny on income tax cost the average family in Britain?
SWINSON: Well, it obviously depends on what their earnings are.
QUESTIONER_0: Well, the official estimates are £175 a year, so wouldn't it be better to say we're putting income tax up by £175 a year?
SWINSON: Well, I mean, people can make their own calculations based on what income tax they pay.
TICE: Richard Tice, the very essence of Peter's question is that people no longer trust and respect what politicians say.
TICE: Manifestos, frankly, has become synonymous with fibs and nonsense.
TICE: I mean, let's remember the Labour Party manifesto in 2017 when they promised that they would respect the referendum and get Brexit done.
TICE: This is a question about the spending and the economy, Richard Tice.
TICE: It's about trust.
TICE: It's about trust in politicians.
TICE: That's the point.
TICE: And that's why... That may be about trust, but this question is not.
TICE: This question is about spending, Richard Tice, and how you can guarantee your spending.
TICE: That's why we called it a contract, which is a business-like word, because I come from the world of business.
TICE: I've been three decades in business.
TICE: In order to get the economy moving, we need to invest over £100 billion building road and rail projects all across the regions that have been so left behind.
TICE: And the truth is that with a proper Brexit, we can cut prices, we can raise wages with a sensible immigration policy,
TICE: and that will grow the economy faster.
STURGEON: Nicola Sturgeon.
STURGEON: I was just chuckling at Richard saying that he doesn't like manifestos.
STURGEON: I think the Brexit Party prefer putting their spending commitments on the side of a bus.
STURGEON: He used to say we've got £350 million a week extra for the NHS.
STURGEON: It's people like him that the public don't trust.
QUESTIONER_0: OK, let's resist the temptation to get onto Brexit at this stage.
QUESTIONER_0: OK, Caroline Lucas for the Greens.
LUCAS: Well, you say resist the temptation to get onto Brexit, but the reality is that neither Richard nor Rishi can guarantee that they're going to be able to make any spending pledges, not that Rishi's got very many, as far as I could see, because Brexit is going to make a real difference to our economy.
LUCAS: It's going to absolutely trash our economy.
LUCAS: It's going to make us wealthier, yes, that's right.
LUCAS: Every single analysis shows that it is going to trash our economy, it's going to throw people out of work, it's going to be a disaster.
LUCAS: So, what you need...
LUCAS: is a set of policies, first of all, to remain inside the EU.
LUCAS: And that is what the Green Party is proposing at this election.
LUCAS: But also, we are proposing a significant investment in a Green New Deal.
LUCAS: And we're completely upfront about that.
LUCAS: That would cost 100 billion pounds a year.
LUCAS: We want to do that for the next 10 years.
QUESTIONER_0: Who will pay for that, Caroline Lucas?
LUCAS: 94 billion of that will come from borrowing and we're not afraid to say that because interest rates are low and if you are investing in assets and in jobs then the money comes back into the Treasury through higher taxes.
PRICE: the global sum that has been offered by either of the big Westminster parties.
PRICE: It is how much of that cake, the share of the cake that is going to come to places like Wales.
PRICE: We have had crumbs over generations.
PRICE: Labour and Conservative governments have seen the gap in wealth
PRICE: between places like Wales and the rich southeast of England growing ever large.
PRICE: I'll give you just one example, Nick.
PRICE: We've got 11% of the railway track of the UK in Wales.
PRICE: How much of the government investment do we get?
PRICE: 1%.
PRICE: Below even our population share.
PRICE: And that's been repeated by Labour governments, by Conservative governments.
PRICE: We should reverse that.
PRICE: We should be investing more in the areas like Wales that need it best.
PRICE: That's the only way that we'll close the economic gap.
PRICE: We're bumping at the bottom of the economic gap.
PRICE: and we need to change that.
QUESTIONER_0: Now, Rebecca Long-Bailey, you started to talk about your spending plans.
QUESTIONER_0: We didn't get particularly on to how you pay for them.
QUESTIONER_0: Who will pay for Labour's manifesto, which is double the size of your one two years ago?
LONG-BAILEY: Well, we're 10 years into a Conservative government who ignored the advice of the IMF, CBI and other business organisations to invest in the critical infrastructure that businesses need to prosper.
QUESTIONER_0: We're short of time, so what's the answer to the question of what we pay?
LONG-BAILEY: So the answer to the question is, our fund, our transformation fund of £400 billion, it will be paid for with government bonds, but we're investing in things that will see a lot of... What about the tax back?
LONG-BAILEY: You mean debt, you mean bankrupting the country?
LONG-BAILEY: This has been advocated by the IMF and the OECD to trigger productivity and growth within the economy.
LONG-BAILEY: We will see an economic return, it will improve tax receipts and it's good for the economy overall.
SUNAK: can pay for it.
SUNAK: going to pay in higher taxes.
SUNAK: Millions of pensioners on low incomes are going to pay in higher taxes, and millions of small businesses are going to pay in higher taxes.
SUNAK: The cost of Corbyn is a bill that Britain simply can't afford.
SUNAK: Rebecca Long-Bailey.
LONG-BAILEY: You're the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, and you've made it very clear there that you don't know the difference between capital expenditure, investment in infrastructure, and day-to-day spending.
LONG-BAILEY: We will keep them very, very, very separately.
LONG-BAILEY: What we bring in in tax receipts, that's what we spend on our public services.
LONG-BAILEY: It's simple as that.
LONG-BAILEY: What we invest in critical infrastructure, we will borrow to invest.
SUNAK: What every independent forecaster has said, you have so many reckless plans for spending, they can't be funded by tax receipts.
QUESTIONER_0: There's really no point.
QUESTIONER_0: Rishi's in act talking over each other.
QUESTIONER_0: Nobody can hear.
QUESTIONER_0: It's very frustration at home.
QUESTIONER_0: So we all get the chance to speak.
QUESTIONER_0: Let's just stop.
QUESTIONER_0: We're going to wind up and move on to the next question in just a second.
QUESTIONER_0: Nicola Sturgeon, there's one thing you raised in your intervention, which I wanted to ask you about.
QUESTIONER_0: You talked about the WASP women, the women whose pension age was changed.
QUESTIONER_0: Are you with Labour, if you're supporting them in a hung parliament?
QUESTIONER_0: You want to spend £58 billion to give Theresa May £22,000 as compensation?
STURGEON: I'm not keen on giving Theresa May personally very much, but that's another matter altogether.
STURGEON: The SNP did some work some months back, where we set out five different options to compensate the WASPI women.
STURGEON: It went from restoring the pension age to 60 to slowing down the pace of change.
STURGEON: We certainly would want to talk to other parties to make sure that that justice is delivered, because this is the question.
STURGEON: You know, these big parties, I think we've seen tonight a glimpse of the dreadful choice between these two main parties that people have.
STURGEON: But they can always find things for the wrong priorities.
STURGEON: Let's make a change and find things for the right priorities in compensating WASP women.
STURGEON: I think it's a top one.
QUESTIONER_0: Lots to talk about, but we do have to move on to the next subject, a subject that's already been raised.
QUESTIONER_0: You won't be entirely surprised, ladies and gentlemen, that the subject is Brexit.
QUESTIONER_0: And the person who's asking about it, Melissa Calder-Matthews, who's from here in Cardiff.
QUESTIONER_4: I was a Remain voter but feel that we're so far along the Brexit journey now that it has to go ahead.
QUESTIONER_4: How do those of you here this evening feel about talk of a second referendum or revoking Article 50?
QUESTIONER_4: Is this not going against the wishes of the 52% of people that voted to leave and a waste of a huge amount of time and money that has already been spent to enable this process to take place?
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you.
QUESTIONER_0: Jo Swinson, Melissa Arse isn't a huge amount of time and money and she voted like you for Remain.
Yeah.
SWINSON: I suppose what I would say, Melissa, is having looked at the last three and a half years, is there anyone seriously who thinks this is going well for our country?
SWINSON: It is a mess.
SWINSON: And it's a mess because back in 2016, they weren't straightforward about what it would mean.
SWINSON: And, you know, we know that remaining in the EU is going to be better for our public services, it's going to be better for our NHS, for our economy, for jobs, for our environment, for workers' rights.
SWINSON: And I think it's right that people have the chance to choose a different path now that all of that is so much clearer.
SWINSON: And, you know, we're in an election.
SWINSON: Liberal Democrats are absolutely standing to stop Brexit.
SWINSON: We've led the campaign for a people's vote and we want to stop Brexit.
SWINSON: And the final thing I would just say is, you know, you said that we're so far along.
SWINSON: I'm sorry...
SWINSON: I'm sorry to have to say this, but we are so not far along on this Brexit journey.
SWINSON: You know, the idea that Brexit is going to be done, we're like in episode one of a ten-season box set, and if you don't like what you've seen up till now, you don't have to watch the rest.
QUESTIONER_0: Carol Lucas, the question, just to remind you, is not, what do you think about Brexit?
QUESTIONER_0: It's, why would you spend, to use the questioner's words, a huge amount of time and money having another vote?
LUCAS: Well Melissa I kind of sympathize first of all with what I sense is a feeling of frustration and lots of us you know are fed up of talking about Brexit and I completely sympathize with you on that.
LUCAS: But the truth is that if we go along with the Brexit plans we are going to be locked into this process for an awful lot longer because we can't just get Brexit done.
LUCAS: It's going to take years to make a new trade agreement.
LUCAS: We are just at the beginning of this.
LUCAS: If you want to end this, the best way to do that is through a democratic way of doing it, and that's why I'm proud to be one of the co-founders of the People's Vote campaign, and we want people to be able to have that right to have their say.
LUCAS: I do think that to go for a unilateral revocation is a slap in the face of 17.4 million people who voted to leave, so that's why I think it is important that they have
LUCAS: You know, people do have their say in a democratic process, but more democracy can never be against democracy.
QUESTIONER_0: Just briefly, Jo Swinson, because I want to bring the others in.
QUESTIONER_0: What Caroline Lucas says is you're wrong to want to revoke Article 50.
QUESTIONER_0: Terrible jargon, but basically means cancelling Brexit without putting it back to the people in another referendum.
SWINSON: Let's just be really clear about our position.
SWINSON: As Liberal Democrats, we want to stop Brexit.
SWINSON: I don't think that's news to people.
SWINSON: And so we said, if we win a majority Liberal Democrat government, we would revoke Article 50, going from 20 MPs to 326.
SWINSON: I think it would be a pretty seismic electoral shift.
SWINSON: And therefore, there would be that democratic mandate.
QUESTIONER_0: So what you're saying, in effect, is I've not a prayer of becoming prime minister, so don't worry about it, because it won't happen.
SWINSON: Well, I would love to do that job.
SWINSON: But if it does happen, then the democratic mandate is there.
QUESTIONER_0: You're not holding out much hope on that.
SUNAK: Rishi Singh.
SUNAK: Well, our view is very straightforward.
SUNAK: Three years ago, the British people voted to leave the EU.
SUNAK: It's time we respected that and actually left.
SUNAK: And with a Conservative government, we can do that within weeks.
SUNAK: With our new deal that we've already negotiated, we can leave by the end of January.
SUNAK: But whether you voted leave or remain, it's time for us as a country to move forward.
SUNAK: not remain stuck in neutral.
SUNAK: So rather than spending years more going round in circles with more referendums, Jeremy Corbyn propped up by the SNP, let's just get Brexit done.
QUESTIONER_0: Rishi Sunak, Carol Lucas said at the beginning that is, in her words, a big lie.
QUESTIONER_0: Just briefly, if you will, Carol Lucas.
QUESTIONER_0: And then, Nicola Sturgeon, just explain why that's a lie, and then I'll get you to respond to it.
QUESTIONER_0: Why are you saying it's a lie?
LUCAS: It's a lie because it makes it sound that you could do it in a matter of weeks or 11 months maximum.
LUCAS: It's going to take us years to negotiate a new trade agreement.
LUCAS: It took seven years with Canada.
LUCAS: It doesn't need to.
LUCAS: Richard Tyson will bring you in.
LUCAS: And so the idea you're going to get it done through this is just simply a fantasy.
STURGEON: Nicola Sturgeon... Caroline's right.
STURGEON: that point.
STURGEON: But can I say, I totally get the frustration.
STURGEON: I get that people are, to use a Scottish word, scunnered by this whole thing.
STURGEON: And I know I'm in a slightly different position to everybody else here, because I'm the First Minister of a country that voted to remain by an overwhelming majority.
STURGEON: And we face being taken out of the European Union against our will.
STURGEON: But this get Brexit done is the biggest con of this election.
STURGEON: The deal that Boris Johnson has negotiated, I think a bad deal, is only a withdrawal deal.
STURGEON: The trade talks haven't started yet.
STURGEON: And, you know, if they don't conclude quickly, then we will very soon, next year, face another no-deal cliff edge, and that would be catastrophic.
QUESTIONER_0: Let's bring Rishi Sunak in, then Richard Tyson to respond to that point.
QUESTIONER_0: Sorry to interrupt.
SUNAK: Well, this has gone on for too long.
SUNAK: We've been stuck in this gridlock and this paralysis for years.
SUNAK: We want to move forward.
SUNAK: And our deal does that.
SUNAK: If we get a majority Conservative government, we will bring that deal back to Parliament, we will vote on it before Christmas, and we will leave before the end of January.
SUNAK: And then, as a country, we can move forward.
SUNAK: and get on with all the other things that we want to do.
SUNAK: Investing in the NHS, police and sport.
SUNAK: We can't do that.
SUNAK: Can I just finish, Nick?
SUNAK: A vote for anyone else on this stage is just going to prolong this gridlock, this delay, this division in our society.
SUNAK: We need to move the country forward.
TICE: Well, let's just be very, very clear.
TICE: It's only thanks to the Brexit Party that Brexit is happening still at all.
TICE: That's the first thing.
TICE: I mean, the Tories three times...
STURGEON: I'm happy to blame them for it.
TICE: Three times the Tories promised, promised, promised to get it done.
TICE: I blame the Tories.
TICE: Hang on.
TICE: Three times the Tories promised, promised, promised, and three times they failed, failed, failed.
TICE: It's the Brexit party that ensures that the wishes of 17.4 million people will be respected.
TICE: Melissa, a second referendum would be a disaster for trust in democracy in this country.
TICE: It would also be a disaster for investment in the economy and for jobs.
TICE: Thank you very much.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you.
TICE: We need to get it sorted and move on.
STURGEON: question to Rishi.
STURGEON: Say the Tories get their way, I hope they don't, the UK is out, nobody but nobody thinks a trade deal can be negotiated and agreed by the end of next year.
STURGEON: That's nonsense, we do.
STURGEON: We don't trust you, sorry.
STURGEON: I don't trust you.
STURGEON: I don't trust you because you don't trust democracy.
STURGEON: You don't trust 17.4 million people.
STURGEON: 17.4 million people.
STURGEON: The Brexit party have got a big responsibility for the mess the UK is in right now.
STURGEON: And we're very proud of what we've achieved.
STURGEON: He's proud of the mess he's achieved in the UK.
STURGEON: But can I finish my question?
STURGEON: We haven't achieved the mess.
TICE: We've got a huge opportunity.
STURGEON: Do you mind if I finish my question?
STURGEON: Nobody thinks the deal can be done in a year and you've ruled out extending the transition.
STURGEON: So is it the Tory position that they are prepared to countenance a no-deal Brexit with all of the catastrophic effect that will have on jobs and living standards and the economy?
STURGEON: I would ask Horatio to rule that out tonight.
SUNAK: We've been here before.
SUNAK: You and others all said the Prime Minister didn't want a Brexit deal.
SUNAK: You said he couldn't get a Brexit deal, it would be impossible.
SUNAK: But he did.
SUNAK: He did get a Great New Deal and he got it in three months.
SUNAK: So you were wrong then and you are wrong now.
STURGEON: Answer the point about no-deal Brexit.
STURGEON: Are you going to rule out a no-deal Brexit in any circumstance?
STURGEON: That's how you negotiate.
STURGEON: That's how you get a good deal.
TICE: I'm being prepared to walk away.
TICE: You've clearly never negotiated... Well, why not ask me?
TICE: I'm a businessman.
TICE: I've negotiated deals over three decades.
STURGEON: Nigel Farage...
TICE: If you're not prepared to walk away, you're not prepared to walk away.
QUESTIONER_0: You're not going to be in government.
QUESTIONER_0: Yes, what's rubbish is to talk over each other.
QUESTIONER_0: Very frustrating for the... Is it frustrating for the audience?
QUESTIONER_0: Very frustrated with you.
QUESTIONER_0: Let's not do it.
QUESTIONER_0: There's a question.
QUESTIONER_0: If Rishi Sunak's going to have one more chance to answer it, we're going to move on to Rebecca Long-Bailey.
QUESTIONER_0: Hasn't had a chance to talk on Brexit.
QUESTIONER_0: No doubt she'll face some questions as well.
QUESTIONER_0: The question is, and you are one of the ministers on the No Deal Planning Committee, and you recently said you were still planning for no deal.
QUESTIONER_0: So the question is, is no deal still a possibility?
SUNAK: We'll be still planning for all the changes that'll come once we leave the European Union, like putting in a new immigration system.
SUNAK: That's something that, of course, we have to plan for.
SUNAK: But the point is this.
SUNAK: People said we couldn't get a deal.
SUNAK: We have got a deal.
SUNAK: OK, you've made that point.
SUNAK: And it's ready to go.
SUNAK: No, we're going to bring in Rebecca Long-Bailey.
QUESTIONER_0: We're going to bring in Rebecca Long-Bailey now.
QUESTIONER_0: Rebecca Long-Bailey, remember what the question was.
QUESTIONER_0: It was from a Remainer, from Melissa, who said, a waste of time and money to have another referendum.
QUESTIONER_0: That is the Labour Party's policy.
LONG-BAILEY: I think the sad reality of the matter is that three years later, the Tories have failed to deliver Brexit.
LONG-BAILEY: And the deal that we've got on the table is economically bad.
LONG-BAILEY: But worse than that, it will lead to elongated trade talks.
LONG-BAILEY: Michael Barnier said it would take up to three years.
LONG-BAILEY: And that's before you add US trade talks or trade talks with any other organisations or countries that will put, potentially, our NHS on the table.
QUESTIONER_0: was about a second referendum, so could you address that, please?
LONG-BAILEY: Well, on a second referendum, I think we've got to heal a divided country and we've got to bring Brexit to a conclusion in a sensible way.
LONG-BAILEY: And that's why we have said that in the first three months of a Labour government, we will secure a deal that's economically good for our economy and doesn't undermine workers' rights and protections, and we will put that deal to a public vote where the people will decide whether they are happy with that final deal and whether it was what they voted for in the first place.
TICE: The Labour Party, they say they can get a deal done in three months.
TICE: But all these other politicians are saying that the deal can't be sorted in 12 months.
TICE: There's no logic to your position.
TICE: From a negotiating point of view, you have to be prepared to walk away from any negotiation, otherwise you will get a bad deal.
TICE: It is as simple as that.
QUESTIONER_0: The Labour Party's position is they can do it quite quickly.
SUNAK: The time on Monday is short.
SUNAK: What is your response?
SUNAK: Well, Labour say they want a second referendum on a new deal that they're going to negotiate, but they can't tell us who's going to support this new deal.
SUNAK: Jeremy Corbyn said he's not going to support it.
SUNAK: No-one from the Shadow Cabinet, as far as I could tell, has said they're going to support it.
SUNAK: We have no idea.
SUNAK: Labour's dither on Brexit just means more delay, more division and more deadlock for our country, and that will just hold us back when we need to move on.
SUNAK: Well, let's see if we can clear that up.
QUESTIONER_0: Rebecca Long-Bailey, will you be supporting Jeremy Corbyn's deal if he gets it and supporting Leave?
LONG-BAILEY: Well, I think it's right that Jeremy has taken a neutral stance.
LONG-BAILEY: He is going to be the Prime Minister that's going to be negotiating with the European Union.
QUESTIONER_0: And he needs to act as an honest broker.
QUESTIONER_0: It's normally the Queen who takes a neutral stance, rather than the Prime Minister, isn't it?
LONG-BAILEY: No, I think it's right that, as a Prime Minister, he takes a neutral position as the honest broker in all of this.
LONG-BAILEY: Now, of course, there will be MPs will choose how they want to vote on this.
LONG-BAILEY: Will you be neutral?
LONG-BAILEY: Well, in terms of my own personal opinion, I will wait to see what the deal looks like, if it's an economically credible deal, whether it protects workers' rights, et cetera, et cetera.
QUESTIONER_0: That's a cop-out in failure of leadership.
QUESTIONER_0: We're going to bring in Adam Price now because they haven't had a chance to talk and we've got other questions.
PRICE: I find this extraordinary and I'm also deeply depressed by what I've seen and no wonder people are turning off politics and there's collapsing trust you know I mean because you know that the level of rancor in the debate we should have sincere disagreement and I can understand you know some people sincerely disagree with me when I say that Brexit is going to
PRICE: hurt the Welsh economy and they still want to continue with it.
PRICE: In terms of the Labour Party's position, the great merit of Jeremy Corbyn, and I knew him when I was at Westminster, he spent more time voting with me than he did with his own party back then, he was a conviction politician who said what he believed clearly, without fear or favour.
PRICE: And yet on this central question, it is a heart, whether we like it or not, of this election, he won't even say where he stands.
PRICE: And no wonder people don't have faith in politicians when the leader of the Labour Party, the candidate to be Prime Minister, won't even tell us where he stands on this central question that's going to cast its shadow for a generation.
LONG-BAILEY: Very briefly, Rebecca Long-Bailey.
LONG-BAILEY: It's right that Jeremy acts as an honest broker in this, because he needs to get a good deal with the European Union, and I think stating how he would vote in a final public vote would undermine that.
LONG-BAILEY: But also, he wants to heal a divided nation and bring people together, because whether you voted Leave or Remain, you didn't vote to be poor, you didn't vote for industries like steel to be undermined, you didn't vote for a trade deal with the US that would put our NHS on the table.
QUESTIONER_0: We're going to move on.
QUESTIONER_0: We're going to move on.
QUESTIONER_0: There are lots of subjects to get through.
QUESTIONER_0: Just briefly, can you think of any other policy in Jeremy Corbyn's lifetime in politics that he's been neutral on?
LONG-BAILEY: Not off the top of my head, no.
QUESTIONER_0: OK, we'll move on to some other questions now, because we've had an awful lot of questions, not just from the people here in the audience, but from those of you at home, from viewers and listeners to tonight's debate.
QUESTIONER_0: I want to get in as many as possible.
QUESTIONER_0: For the next couple of questions, we're going to keep the answers brief before we move on to some more substantial questions.
QUESTIONER_0: Just a sentence, even a word, would do.
QUESTIONER_0: And to speed us on...
QUESTIONER_0: You're not looking like that's a terribly likely argument.
QUESTIONER_0: We'll try our best.
QUESTIONER_0: Let's get the first one that came from Elliot Horton from Bristol.
QUESTIONER_0: Caroline Lucas.
LUCAS: Definitely not, under any circumstance.
LUCAS: Richard Tice.
TICE: After careful consideration, yes, if it was essential.
TICE: Adam Price.
TICE: Absolutely not.
PRICE: Nuclear weapons are an abomination.
QUESTIONER_0: Joe Swinson.
SWINSON: Yes, I would be prepared to.
SWINSON: Obviously, I would assess the situation.
QUESTIONER_0: It's a possible thing for you to contemplate.
QUESTIONER_0: Rishi Sunak?
SUNAK: Yes, if the circumstances demanded.
QUESTIONER_0: And Rebecca Long-Bailey?
LONG-BAILEY: Well, I think the protection of the people of Britain is paramount for any prime minister.
LONG-BAILEY: And of course, they'd need to look at the circumstances.
LONG-BAILEY: But of course, they would need to take action if necessary.
QUESTIONER_0: Nicola Sturge?
STURGEON: No, absolutely and emphatically not, because it would lead to the deaths of possibly tens of millions of people and wipe out swathes of our civilisation.
STURGEON: So no, under no circumstances would I use nuclear weapons.
QUESTIONER_0: And if it came to it and hung Parliament negotiations, would that issue of Trident be as important as Scottish independence and Brexit?
STURGEON: Less important?
STURGEON: I think Trident is both a financial issue, I don't think we should waste £200 billion on it, but it's a moral issue.
STURGEON: We should be investing in health and education, not in weapons of mass destruction.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you for your impressive discipline with the short answers.
QUESTIONER_0: Next one.
QUESTIONER_0: John Landon of Gateshead says, in an environment of lies and mistrust... Easy one, this, for you.
QUESTIONER_0: ..why should we believe you?
QUESTIONER_0: Adam Price.
PRICE: Well, you know, when I was growing up in Ammanford, the son of a miner in the 1980s, if I wanted a political career, I should have joined the Labour Party.
PRICE: I joined my party, Plaid, because for me, politics isn't about a career.
PRICE: It's about actually what you believe, saying it clearly, and trying to make Wales and the world a better place.
SUNAK: Thank you, Rishi Sunak.
SUNAK: You're right, trust is paramount.
SUNAK: And the single biggest thing that the government can do now to restore trust in our system is to deliver the result of the referendum.
SUNAK: And with a Conservative government, we will do that in weeks and start rebuilding trust with the British people and moving on to all the other things that they want us to focus on.
SUNAK: Nicola Sturgeon.
STURGEON: Like Adam, I've been campaigning for what I believe in for all of my life, even in the days when it wasn't as electorally popular as it is today.
STURGEON: I'm also the leader of a government in Scotland.
STURGEON: We're not perfect, we make mistakes, but I'm not asking here to be judged just on my promises.
STURGEON: I'm asking people to look at what the SNP government is doing day in and day out.
STURGEON: Much of what Labour is promising in this election, free prescriptions, free personal care, for example, are things the SNP in government in Scotland is already doing.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you.
QUESTIONER_0: Rebecca Long-Bailey.
LONG-BAILEY: I think we need honesty in politics.
LONG-BAILEY: And we sometimes see that from politicians.
LONG-BAILEY: We've seen a lot of dishonesty, if I'm honest, in this campaign.
LONG-BAILEY: And we need to bring honesty back to politics, because it undermines trust.
LONG-BAILEY: Every politician becomes involved in politics because they have a vision of society, whether I agree with it or not.
SWINSON: Well, I think on the issue of the European Union, I'm a passionate Remainer and lots of people have tried to say that I shouldn't be standing up for what I believe in and tried to say that, you know, it's wrong to argue for a people's vote.
SWINSON: We've had the discussion tonight, but I've absolutely stuck to my guns and I will continue to do so to stand up for my principles and you can see that in action.
TICE: Richard Tice.
TICE: Well, the truth is that trust has absolutely collapsed in politicians, because people are sick and tired of politicians promising things and then not delivering.
TICE: And we saw that with Labour Party manifestos.
TICE: We saw it with the referendum, of course, when the £9 million Conservative government leaflet promised to carry out the will of the people, and it's not yet been done.
TICE: We have to get it done, and after that, trust can start to be rebuilt.
TICE: Caroline Lucas.
LUCAS: Well, listening to Richard and Rishi, frankly, I think you've got your own answer as to why there is so much distrust.
LUCAS: Because once again, these issues are being used as political footballs.
LUCAS: I really feel, you know, so depressed that people are thinking that perhaps it's not worth voting because they don't have confidence in us.
LUCAS: All I can say is that it makes me very angry when all of us are tarnished with that same brush.
LUCAS: I can say that as someone who has been
LUCAS: I've been banging on in the Green Party since 1986.
LUCAS: If I was going to go for a career in politics, I might have found a faster route.
LUCAS: I'm in the Green Party because I passionately believe in what we stand for, and I hope others will do as well.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you very much indeed.
QUESTIONER_0: Well, you've all won my vote for keeping sure answers when they're asked.
QUESTIONER_0: So, relatively sure.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you very much.
QUESTIONER_0: Let's move on to another vital topic now.
QUESTIONER_0: It is, of course, climate change.
QUESTIONER_0: More important, some would argue, than any.
QUESTIONER_0: And the question comes from Tabitha McGuinness in Newport.
QUESTIONER_0: Tabitha.
QUESTIONER_5: I'm a teacher, and many of my students rate climate change as one of their top priorities, even attending climate strikes.
QUESTIONER_5: What changes would you propose that would help them to see the immediate change they would like to see?
QUESTIONER_0: So, Tabitha's pupils want to see immediate change, not an argument at 20, 30, 40, 50.
QUESTIONER_0: Immediate change is the question on the issue of climate change.
QUESTIONER_0: What immediate change, Caroline Lucas, should they see?
LUCAS: Well, Tabitha, thank you to your students and for students up and down the country who are taking action on the climate.
LUCAS: I was with Climate Strikers in Brighton just this morning and I think the first thing I would say to your students is that they have already changed things.
LUCAS: You know, never believe that they're not making
LUCAS: The fact that Parliament has declared a climate emergency is because of the pressure from young people.
LUCAS: There is nothing more morally powerful than having a young person looking at you in the face and saying, you are trashing our future.
LUCAS: So, Parliament has declared that climate emergency.
LUCAS: I'm very glad that after a Green Party initiative around the country, local councils are declaring climate emergencies.
LUCAS: What we have to do now, of course, is to put those policies into place.
LUCAS: Now, that will take a bit longer and no doubt we'll have an argument about exactly which policies we need.
QUESTIONER_0: Give us a couple of examples people at home might think of.
QUESTIONER_0: In particular, you've targeted aviation, for example, in the Green Manifesto.
QUESTIONER_0: Give us an example of what would affect people's lives, briefly, if you would.
LUCAS: Well, I want to talk about the positive things that would happen for people's lives.
LUCAS: I think that if you were to insulate every single home in Britain, you would create around a million green jobs, you would get people's fuel bills down so people weren't dying of fuel poverty in the 21st century, and you would also tackle climate emissions.
LUCAS: So the real price here is
LUCAS: that tackling the climate crisis isn't about hair shirts, it is about a better quality of life as well.
QUESTIONER_0: Forgive me, we've all got to move quite quickly to get through all the questions we want to go.
QUESTIONER_0: Jo Swinson.
SWINSON: Well, earlier this year, I went along to the Extinction Rebellion protests, and I went along with my five-year-old son, and we sat and we talked, and most polite protest I've ever been to, I have to say, and we talked to different people there, and seeing that crisis through the eyes of a child with that future focus, I have to say, it is just so urgent, and your students are quite right.
QUESTIONER_0: But the question, remember, is what immediate changes need to be made.
SWINSON: And this is an issue right now.
SWINSON: Tonight, there are families who are living in makeshift accommodation, living out of plastic bags with whatever of their possessions remain, because they have experienced those horrendous floods in Yorkshire and Derbyshire.
SWINSON: So this is an issue right now.
SWINSON: So some of the things we can do to rapidly cut
SWINSON: carbon dioxide, the things we know best are insulating our homes, a rapid program of home insulation.
SWINSON: And the new homes that we build should all be zero carbon.
SWINSON: We know how to do this.
SWINSON: And making sure we take the fossil fuels out of our electricity generation.
SWINSON: renewables, we should be so much more ambitious.
SWINSON: The cost has already come down significantly.
SWINSON: Offshore wind is the cheapest electricity that you can now create, thanks to Liberal Democrats supporting that technology.
QUESTIONER_0: Let me ask you what I asked Caroline Lucas, which is your manifesto, like the Green manifesto, has talked about penalising people who fly a lot.
QUESTIONER_0: So just briefly, and then I'll get other people to respond.
SWINSON: Absolutely.
SWINSON: So people who take more than three return international flights a year, those frequent flyers would pay more under our plans.
SWINSON: And it is those people who take the many, many, many flights that we need to target with those.
SWINSON: Richard Tyson.
TICE: There are two immediate things that we should be doing.
TICE: We should be doing, as a country, we should be leading the way globally with a worldwide initiative to plant hundreds and hundreds of millions of trees to capture CO2.
TICE: The next thing we should do is we need to invest in major technology, green technology, so that we can capture CO2 and reduce CO2 emissions.
TICE: There's one more thing that we don't talk enough about, and that is recycling our own waste.
TICE: My son in Asia, he rang me up in horror
TICE: when he saw, and he was clearing up, piles and piles of plastic bottles on beaches in Asia, and where did they come from?
TICE: Supermarkets in Britain.
TICE: We have to recycle our own waste.
QUESTIONER_0: Now, forgive me, politicians, but when all politicians agree that something's very serious, and all of them agree that it can be done without much pain, people often think, well, can that really be true?
QUESTIONER_0: Here is... Who's willing to say, actually, you know what, your lifestyles will have to change, something will have to give?
STURGEON: Nicola Sturgeon, will you?
STURGEON: I think people's lifestyles do have to change, but I also think governments and industry has to take the lead, because there's a relatively small number of companies across the world that are responsible for a disproportionate amount of emissions.
STURGEON: Now, again, this is one of the areas where I say, look at what my government is doing, not just on what we're promising.
STURGEON: We've got the toughest targets anywhere in the world.
STURGEON: 75% of Scotland's electricity already comes from renewable sources.
STURGEON: Last year, we planted 84% of all of the trees planted in the UK.
STURGEON: We're in Scotland, 22 million trees.
STURGEON: We're about to invest half a billion pounds in new bus infrastructure.
QUESTIONER_0: Would you stop all new oil drilling in Scotland?
QUESTIONER_0: Because people would argue fossil fuels should go.
STURGEON: We have to move away from that.
STURGEON: The reason you can't do it immediately without reducing demand is that you'd make yourself more reliant on imports, which would increase your carbon emissions.
STURGEON: But the transition away from fossil fuels is important and is underway.
SUNAK: Thank you very much.
SUNAK: Rishi Sunder.
SUNAK: Tabitha, I'm not sure how old your pupils are, but my younger daughter's seven, and she's the climate change champion in our house.
SUNAK: And she brings home how important this is in all those practical everyday ways that you were talking about, the immediate steps.
SUNAK: She turns off all the lights.
SUNAK: She makes sure that the tap is off when she's brushing her teeth and she's going through making sure that everything goes in the right recycling bin.
SUNAK: And now there are more than one recycling bin.
SUNAK: So those are all the practical immediate things.
SUNAK: But for the government the most important thing for us to do if we have a strong economy we can then invest in innovation because ultimately it's going to be innovation.
SUNAK: It's going to be cheaper car batteries.
SUNAK: new forms of renewable offshore wind or, indeed, green infrastructure that solve this problem.
SUNAK: We can only make those investments if we have a strong economy and that's something that we're very, very committed to.
LUCAS: Rebecca Lockhart.
LUCAS: Caroline Lucas, briefly.
LUCAS: Can you explain to her the fact that your government has been slashing support to renewable energies, that flogged off the Green Investment Bank, that has made it harder to have onshore wind in this country.
LUCAS: Your track record on climate and the environment is abysmal.
SUNAK: Let's look at that record.
SUNAK: We've decarbonised our economy faster than any other major economy in the world.
SUNAK: By outsourcing everything to China.
SUNAK: We've been the first to phase out coal, and we are leading the world in banning single-use plastics.
SUNAK: It's actually a record that I'm very proud to stand here on.
SUNAK: And we talk about renewable energy.
SUNAK: We are now the world leader in offshore wind.
SUNAK: That is something that this government has supported.
LONG-BAILEY: Thank you very much.
SUNAK: Thank you, Rebecca Long-Bailey.
SUNAK: Rebecca Long-Bailey, please.
LONG-BAILEY: I think Rishi's heart is in the right place but his party is led by a Prime Minister who called climate change a primitive fear without foundation and the policies that they have driven forward so far underline his true belief in this.
LONG-BAILEY: But ultimately this election
LONG-BAILEY: is critical to tackle the climate crisis.
LONG-BAILEY: We are running out of time.
LONG-BAILEY: The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change have said that we have to take the vast majority of action to decarbonise our economy by 2030.
LONG-BAILEY: And that's why we've rolled out a very detailed Green Industrial Revolution to outline how we're going to do that.
PRICE: Adam Price.
PRICE: OK, what could we do immediately?
PRICE: We could pass a Clean Air Act.
PRICE: The Welsh Labour government could do it here.
PRICE: We would take them to court because the 2,000 people, 200 in this city, that die unnecessarily because of pollution in air.
PRICE: We could do that now.
PRICE: Your party could do that now, Rebecca.
PRICE: We are going to bring in a clean air act.
PRICE: Yeah, but you're saying you're doing England.
PRICE: You're in government here in Wales.
PRICE: People will judge you, not by your words, but your deeds.
PRICE: You're not doing it here.
PRICE: We could actually massively improve the level of procurement of local food.
PRICE: You know, our hospitals, our schools that are buying imported food, when we could actually be supporting local food systems, helping our environment and our economy as well.
QUESTIONER_0: Forgive me, Adam, we've got to keep moving because we've got lots of subjects that we still want to get through.
QUESTIONER_0: I know it's a huge topic and it's frustrating to move on, but we do want to talk about the National Health Service tonight.
QUESTIONER_0: Lucy Taylor is with us.
QUESTIONER_0: Lucy, from Cardiff.
QUESTIONER_6: I'm studying pharmacy and I'm genuinely worried about what my future will look like.
QUESTIONER_6: The NHS is failing.
QUESTIONER_6: What are you going to do to stop this and make sure it's not sold to the highest bidder?
QUESTIONER_0: Lucy is studying pharmacy.
QUESTIONER_0: What are you doing?
QUESTIONER_0: Two-part question to deal with the fact the NHS, in her words, is failing.
QUESTIONER_0: And what will you do to ensure it is not sold off to the highest bidder?
QUESTIONER_0: Rishi Sunak.
SUNAK: Lucy, I grew up in an NHS family.
SUNAK: Dad was a GP and my mum was a pharmacist.
SUNAK: I spent my entire childhood working in her pharmacy and I saw firsthand what an unbelievable difference the NHS made to my parents' patients and their lives.
SUNAK: They became part of our family.
SUNAK: And that's why I and my party are deeply committed to the NHS and investing in it.
SUNAK: We've outlined a plan for £34 billion more.
SUNAK: That will go on putting 50,000 nurses on our wards, 50 million more GP appointments and new and upgraded hospitals.
SUNAK: But I say this, it's because we all care so deeply about the NHS that we must get Brexit done so that we can focus on it properly and give it the support and the investment that it deserves.
QUESTIONER_0: Let's focus on what she said, which is, how will you ensure it isn't sold to the highest bidder?
SUNAK: The NHS is not for sale, never has been, and never will be.
QUESTIONER_0: OK. Rebecca Long-Bailey, you've heard him say that.
QUESTIONER_0: You've heard the Prime Minister say that.
QUESTIONER_0: Why do you insist on claiming that it is for sale?
LONG-BAILEY: Well, I mean, this government has been in place for 10 years now.
LONG-BAILEY: We don't trust a word they say on the NHS.
LONG-BAILEY: We've got 4.4 million people on waiting lists to have operations.
LONG-BAILEY: My husband was one of them, who had his operation cancelled yesterday.
LONG-BAILEY: But on the issue of the NHS being up for sale, documents were released...
LONG-BAILEY: It's not.
LONG-BAILEY: Come on.
LONG-BAILEY: I'll be honest with people, it's not up for sale.
LONG-BAILEY: Let's only be polite to let me finish.
LONG-BAILEY: Stop scaremongering.
LONG-BAILEY: Documents were released this week that showed very clearly that the government had been involved in numerous discussions with US trade officials where the NHS services, as it was referred to, were on the table.
LONG-BAILEY: Richard Tice.
LONG-BAILEY: This is ludicrous.
TICE: This is ludicrous.
TICE: The Labour Party clearly don't understand the difference between buying and selling.
TICE: The NHS buys lots of products, beds, curtains, sheets, drugs, all sorts of things from private providers.
TICE: Nothing is for sale in the NHS.
TICE: It provides incredible frontline care and great outcomes.
TICE: I would say to Lucy, the NHS is not failing.
TICE: But what we do need to do, as well as investing more money, we have to manage it better, that's crucial, and we have to cut out the waste.
TICE: My mother sadly died in April and it absolutely broke my heart and broke the heart of the nurse who came to collect the drugs that were still unopened.
TICE: The seals hadn't been broken.
TICE: And the nurse wept as she said, we have to literally pay to bin these drugs.
TICE: We can't reuse them in this country.
TICE: We can't give them to third world countries.
TICE: That is a lack of common sense.
TICE: Well, let's get better.
TICE: We need to manage it better.
TICE: Understood.
TICE: Cut out the waste.
TICE: And we need to stop the drugs.
TICE: But what we do need to do is we need to stop the drugs companies from ripping off the NHS.
QUESTIONER_0: So just to be clear on the point about for sale, what the documents appear to say... Go on then, Rebecca Long-Bailey, you put the question to him.
QUESTIONER_0: Let Rebecca Long-Bailey put the question.
QUESTIONER_0: Let her put the question.
QUESTIONER_0: What were you putting to him?
LONG-BAILEY: The discussions that were referred to in the papers released this week showed that NHS pharmacy and drugs that we would be procuring from the US would be on the table.
LONG-BAILEY: They talked about extending patents to ensure that prices stayed up and there have been clear indications on White House websites that they're sick of the freeloading of other companies and organizations across the world who were driving US drug prices down.
QUESTIONER_0: OK, I want to bring some other people in.
QUESTIONER_0: Nicola Sturgeon, your party has backed Labour in making this claim.
QUESTIONER_0: What is the evidence?
QUESTIONER_0: And I'll bring Ritchie Soonack in to answer it in a second.
STURGEON: Well, the papers that were leaked the other day do set out what the evidence is, the fact that these discussions have already been happening.
STURGEON: And I'm going to be pretty blunt here.
STURGEON: When Boris Johnson says that the NHS is not on the table in a future trade deal, I simply do not trust him, and I do not believe him on that point.
TICE: It's ludicrous, it's scaremongering, it's nonsense.
STURGEON: We propose, well let's put it beyond that, we're proposing an NHS Protection Act so that in law it would not be possible to put the NHS on the table and it would be protected from trade deals.
SUNAK: Just respond to the point that this was in the documents, is the claim being made?
SUNAK: I mean, people can see for themselves.
SUNAK: And it's just a desperate conspiracy theory.
SUNAK: We're absolutely crystal clear.
SUNAK: The NHS will not be on the table.
SUNAK: The price the NHS pays for drugs will not be on the table.
SUNAK: We will walk away from any trade discussion where that's put on the table.
SUNAK: We care deeply about supporting our NHS.
LUCAS: Caroline Lucas.
LUCAS: Why would we trust
LUCAS: Boris Johnson, first of all, has been telling us that there are going to be 40 hospitals that turn out to be six, that there are going to be 50,000 nurses that turn out to be more like 30,000 if we're lucky.
LUCAS: The fact is that in those documents, if the British government had wanted to, it could have explicitly said the NHS is not up for negotiations, just like the US did on issues around climate change.
LUCAS: It chose not to do so.
LUCAS: So we are absolutely right to say that the NHS is at risk here.
QUESTIONER_0: Whose side are you on here?
QUESTIONER_0: Because you were in government at one stage.
QUESTIONER_0: Of course, there were plenty of private companies carrying out operations for the NHS.
QUESTIONER_0: I think at the current time, it's 600,000 operations carried out last year by private companies at no cost to the patients in the NHS.
SWINSON: If you can cut waiting lists, I think that's a good thing to get more people treated more quickly.
SWINSON: But I tell you what, I mean, basically what Rishi is saying about the NHS, you just cannot deliver it.
SWINSON: The best way to protect the NHS from us begging the US for a trade deal is by not having to beg the US for a trade deal in the first place by remaining in the EU.
SWINSON: And we have tens of thousands of doctors and nurses working in our hospitals as GPs, as carers,
SWINSON: And we are already down 5,000 nurses from other EU countries in the last two years.
SWINSON: What Rishi wants to do is then charge nurses from other EU countries for the privilege of coming to work in our NHS to use it.
SWINSON: He wants to charge them 600 quid a year, a tax on nurses.
SWINSON: How is that going to help our NHS get those vital nurses and doctors that we need to have to make sure that we look after people in our country?
QUESTIONER_0: Brief answer.
QUESTIONER_0: We may move on to the issue of immigration in a second.
QUESTIONER_0: I want to bring in Adam Price.
SUNAK: A brief answer there, if you would.
SUNAK: Well, I think we've heard about this conspiracy theory time and time again.
SUNAK: It's simply not right.
SUNAK: We are going to invest in the NHS, in nurses, in more hospitals, in more diagnostic equipment, in more GP appointments.
SUNAK: We're going to be able to do all of that because once Brexit's done, the economy will grow and we will have the resources to do that.
SUNAK: If we are trapped, but if we are trapped,
SUNAK: in this Brexit paralysis.
SUNAK: And if we are trapped in that, we will not be able to focus properly on the NHS.
SUNAK: And that's what we've got on offer.
PRICE: Adam Price from Plaid Cymru.
PRICE: Let's go back to Lucy's question.
PRICE: The reality of it is the NHS is facing the deepest crisis probably in its existence.
PRICE: And that is also true here in Wales.
PRICE: I'm going to refer to the worst ever A&E waiting list that we're facing, worse than England or Scotland.
PRICE: Pharmacies, you know, there have been plans to privatise pharmacies in the health board in North Wales, that same health board that has been in special measures with the Labour government because it's been in crisis.
PRICE: There's been no improvement.
PRICE: They brought in somebody then, a consultant, paid £2,000 a day, and he came up with a recommendation.
PRICE: What was it?
PRICE: that nurses working in the NHS in North Wales should take unpaid breaks.
PRICE: So yes, absolutely, the Conservative Party has got some questions to answer, but the Labour Party that's running the NHS in Wales has some questions too.
PRICE: We need to value our NHS, and unfortunately, there's been a lack of focus on this from both of the Westminster parties over successive generations.
QUESTIONER_0: Rebecca Long-Bailey, what's your answer to Plaid Cymru saying that the NHS here
LONG-BAILEY: We talked about trusting politics earlier on, and all we've heard tonight are mistruths.
LONG-BAILEY: In Wales, the Welsh Government put £240 million into the NHS.
LONG-BAILEY: That was the highest of any nation.
LONG-BAILEY: In the UK, with Rishi talking about, you know, his pride of the NHS, but £7.7 billion has been cut from social care alone since 2010.
LONG-BAILEY: Your record speaks for itself.
LONG-BAILEY: We're going to invest £26 billion, that's a £40 billion cash terms increase to the NHS to bring it well above 4% increase in spending.
PRICE: Rebecca, do you know even what has been going on in Wales?
PRICE: We've had the scandals, haven't we, over the maternity services and the deaths of babies in England.
PRICE: We've had exactly
PRICE: the same at Cwm Taf here in Wales, you know, an official report pointing out to the serious failings of your government.
PRICE: If you criticise the Conservative Party rightly for the unnecessary failings there, surely admit and be honest about the fact that your government here has also failed those mothers and fathers and people in the NHS in Wales as well.
LONG-BAILEY: There should be a full legal process.
LONG-BAILEY: I don't know about the case that's been referred to but knowing from my legal experience there should be a full legal investigation and a public inquiry into this incident which sounds horrific but when I talk about public funding for our NHS we know that even in Wales it can be increased and they are linked to
LONG-BAILEY: to the British government in terms of the funding that they can receive on many areas.
LONG-BAILEY: And we are not receiving funding for our NHS and that's why Labour has promised to give the biggest increase we have ever seen to our NHS.
QUESTIONER_0: Just before we do move on, finally, you did raise the issue of untruths in this debate on the NHS.
QUESTIONER_0: Would you accept that saying that people who have cancer will get a five-figure bill in the future for their treatment is an untruth?
LONG-BAILEY: Well, I don't know who you're referring to there.
QUESTIONER_0: Well, it's a Labour Party email that has gone out to supporters.
QUESTIONER_0: Imagine what you would feel if you got a five-figure bill for a cancer treatment or if you had to pay to give birth.
QUESTIONER_0: Are you claiming that there is anybody on this stage who is in favour of having a five-figure bill
QUESTIONER_0: for cancer treatment.
LONG-BAILEY: Certainly if we privatise our NHS, that could be the direction of travel and that's why it's so important to make sure that our NHS isn't on the table in any future US trade deals because that's what Donald Trump wants.
LONG-BAILEY: Make no bones about it, he has said publicly, yes, the NHS is on the table.
QUESTIONER_0: So are you accusing Rishi Sunak's party of wanting to privatise the NHS and charge £5,000 for cancer treatment?
LONG-BAILEY: been his party's direction of trouble since the NHS was created.
LONG-BAILEY: Let's not beat around the bush.
SUNAK: That is totally and utterly ridiculous.
SUNAK: We are deeply committed to an NHS free at the point of use as it always has been.
SUNAK: The real risk to the NHS, Rebecca, why don't you tell us, how much is it going to cost to implement the four-day week in the NHS?
LONG-BAILEY: OK, let's clarify that.
LONG-BAILEY: We already said that there's going to be a four-day week in the NHS, so don't try and throw around figures like that that you know aren't true.
LONG-BAILEY: I'm a bigger man than that, Rishi.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you very much.
QUESTIONER_0: You both had the chance to answer the controversies in health, and there are other controversies, of course.
QUESTIONER_0: Immigration is one of those subjects that never raises controversy, but let's see if it does tonight.
QUESTIONER_0: We've got Mahesh Nayyar here, who comes from near Aberystwyth.
QUESTIONER_0: Mahesh.
QUESTIONER_0: Hello.
QUESTIONER_0: Please, your question.
Yeah.
QUESTIONER_7: UK immigration laws don't treat EU and non-EU citizens equally now.
QUESTIONER_7: Should this change, no matter whether we leave or remain?
QUESTIONER_0: Should UK immigration law change so that EU and non-EU citizens are treated the same?
QUESTIONER_0: Richard Tice.
TICE: Mahesh, thank you.
TICE: Look, I think the reality is what we want is a sensible, fair immigration policy that works for our country.
TICE: And if we look back to the 1990s, as a nation, we've always welcomed immigration.
TICE: And in the 1990s, we had immigration of about 1,000 people a week.
TICE: Wages grew at a sensible pace.
TICE: We had enough doctors and teachers and nurses for our public services.
TICE: So, actually, if you have a sensible system, and we believe that an Australian-style points-based system, based on skills, is the right way forward, then that actually works for our economy and works for our own people.
QUESTIONER_0: But what we must do... What's the answer to his question, though, about whether they should be treated the same, people from in the EU and outside, which, of course, at the moment, they can't be.
TICE: Well, and I think we should, yes is the simple answer, because we need to have a system that is fair to everybody.
TICE: We need to think about our Commonwealth partners and friends, for example, not just people from the EU.
LUCAS: Well, I think that we have an existing relationship with the EU.
LUCAS: And as a result, we have freedom of movement.
LUCAS: And I'm very proud to stand up for freedom of movement.
LUCAS: I think it's been an extraordinary gift to this country to be able to travel and study and live and love in 27 other countries.
LUCAS: I think it's been an extraordinary gift for people from our country to go there and for them to come here.
LUCAS: So I'm proud to stand up on this platform and to say that I believe in the power of freedom of movement.
LUCAS: And I think it's a positive thing.
LUCAS: What I also think
QUESTIONER_0: So you do think that people should be treated differently as a result?
QUESTIONER_0: People in the EU get freedom of movement, people in the rest of the world do not.
LUCAS: I would like to see a levelling upwards when it comes to fairness, because what I'm deeply worried about is the kinds of rules, for example, that will break up families, that will end up in things like immigration detention, that has things like a minimum income rule.
LUCAS: I think all of those are deeply unfair.
LUCAS: Family reunion ought to be supported, so we need fair immigration rules.
SWINSON: I mean, I want to remain in the European Union and protect freedom of movement.
SWINSON: But I also want us to change the debate that we have about immigration in this country.
SWINSON: Because so often it's talked about in sort of hushed tones and some kind of negative and all of the dog whistles that we've seen.
SWINSON: And I think we should proudly say,
SWINSON: Immigration is a good thing.
SWINSON: In fact, immigration is a brilliant thing, that we have people from other countries around the world who want to come to our country and work in our NHS and our schools, work in our farms and our restaurants and bars, be part of our society.
SWINSON: You know, we are a nation of immigrants.
SWINSON: Whether it was the founder of Marks and Spencers or Rita Ora or Mo Farah, we should not be sort of in some kind of Dutch auction about how harsh we can be in immigration.
SWINSON: We should be celebrating immigration.
QUESTIONER_0: Rishi Sunak, the question, just to remind you, I know you want to talk broader, all of you, about immigration, but is whether EU citizens and non-EU should be treated the same?
SUNAK: Good evening, Mahesh.
SUNAK: I'm the son of immigrants.
SUNAK: My parents came here 60 years ago.
SUNAK: And I'm a British Asian.
SUNAK: I swore my oath as an MP on the Bhagavad Gita, which is the Hindu holy scripture.
SUNAK: So I am living proof that this is a welcoming, meritocratic and tolerant country.
SUNAK: But it's also right that we control our borders.
SUNAK: And after we leave the EU, we can introduce an Australian points-based system, which will allow us to decide who comes here on the basis of what they have to offer, and as you said, not on the basis of what country they happen to come from.
SUNAK: I don't think that's right, and that is why we must get Brexit done and introduce this new system.
SUNAK: The alternative is unlimited, uncontrolled immigration that treats different people from different countries
SUNAK: differently and that is simply not fair.
LONG-BAILEY: We need to step away from the dog whistle rhetoric on this issue.
LONG-BAILEY: There are a number of anomalies.
LONG-BAILEY: One of the things that often strikes me in a general election campaign is how those who have got British citizenship who aren't from the EU can vote in an election, yet EU citizens who have been here for many, many years aren't allowed to take part in something that could determine their future, and we'd change that as a Labour government.
LONG-BAILEY: We know that if we're still part of the EU, freedom of movement remains, but if not,
LONG-BAILEY: We want every single EU citizen who's here in the UK to remain with full rights and protections, and we want that reciprocated for UK nationals in the EU.
LONG-BAILEY: Now, on the wider system of immigration and what that could look like, obviously that would be part of negotiations, but it has to be sensible and it has to be fair and it has to work for businesses and the economy.
LONG-BAILEY: We've got over 43,000 vacancies in the NHS for nurses, for example, and we need to fill them immediately while we train up
LONG-BAILEY: our own nurses to be able to carry out those roles in the future.
LONG-BAILEY: We've got to be sensible about this.
SUNAK: Do you think, Rishi Sunak, have you got a question for her before I bring in Nicholas?
SUNAK: I was going to make the observation that everyone on this stage who wants to stay in the European Union, that means accepting the free movement of people.
SUNAK: So, to answer Mahesh's question, if you believe that we should treat everyone the same, then you have to extend free movement of people to everywhere in the world.
SUNAK: And that's what everyone else on this stage who wants to stay in the European Union has to say to your question.
SUNAK: Only if we can leave the EU can we introduce a system that controls and treats everybody the same.
SUNAK: There was a deep sigh, First Minister.
STURGEON: Yeah, I mean, I'm going to just be frank on this, and it may not always be popular.
STURGEON: Firstly, I don't believe EU nationals should lose rights that they've got.
STURGEON: I think the way in which EU nationals who've made a massive contribution to this country have been treated since Brexit has been absolutely shameful.
STURGEON: But I do think we should make it more possible to attract talent from non-EU countries.
STURGEON: As you know, I'm the First Minister of Scotland.
STURGEON: If you look ahead for 25 years, all of the growth in Scotland's population is projected to come from inward migration.
STURGEON: If we make it harder, then the risk is our population will fall and that will have a
STURGEON: negative impact on our economy.
STURGEON: I also hate the tone of the debate around immigration, the hostile environment demonising immigrants.
STURGEON: Imagine if British citizens living in other countries were talked about and treated in the way that immigrants here are sometimes talked about.
STURGEON: It's shameful, it's wrong and we need to change it for hard economic reasons as well as for bigger value-based reasons.
PRICE: I think my general approach to the question of immigration is very simple.
PRICE: I started with that wonderful Welsh word, croeso, welcome.
PRICE: I want us to be a welcoming society.
PRICE: Our EU citizens that are here, people from other parts of the world, they are contributing hugely to our economy, entrepreneurially, in terms of our public services.
PRICE: I, yes, am a strong believer in staying within the EU and, indeed, freedom of movement.
PRICE: I don't think you could apply the same rules exactly in terms of how you approach immigration from non-EU citizens, but I absolutely, speaking as somebody whose partner's family came in from the Commonwealth, I absolutely want to see talent arriving here from all parts of the world because we need that talent
PRICE: We need it in our public services and our economy too.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you, Adam.
QUESTIONER_0: Most opinion polls suggest that the public do wish to see controls and indeed cuts in immigration, so who wants to...
QUESTIONER_0: Hold on, hold on, hold on.
QUESTIONER_0: Who here wants to say that they do want to cut immigration?
QUESTIONER_0: Are any of you willing to say you want to cut immigration?
QUESTIONER_0: And could we correct you on that?
LUCAS: Because it is not the case.
LUCAS: When people are shown that freedom of movement is a reciprocal right, then actually it's something that is popular in this country.
QUESTIONER_0: Understood.
QUESTIONER_0: The headline figure is for cutting back.
QUESTIONER_0: You ask different questions, you get different answers.
QUESTIONER_0: That's perfectly reasonable.
SUNAK: Under the Conservatives, immigration will be lower.
SUNAK: more important than the numbers is having control.
SUNAK: It's about us being in charge of who's coming to this country on the basis of what they offer.
SUNAK: And that's the opportunity we will have when we leave the EU and introduce our own system.
QUESTIONER_0: Will it be lower under Labour, Rebecca Lombardi?
SUNAK: We will have control.
SUNAK: We don't want to perpetuate unlimited.
LONG-BAILEY: I think this is really, really irresponsible from the Chief Secretary of the Treasury who is responsible for our economy.
LONG-BAILEY: Many of the businesses that I meet can't access the skills they need or they simply don't have workers in the area that will do the types of work that they need to be carried out, whether you're looking at the hospitality sector in certain parts of the UK, whether you're looking at the farming industry.
LONG-BAILEY: We need migrant labour to assist our economy and we need to have a sense
LONG-BAILEY: to be
TICE: So you want uncontrolled, unlimited immigration?
LONG-BAILEY: No, we want a sensible immigration system that works in the interest of business and our economy.
LONG-BAILEY: Richard Tice first.
TICE: Richard Tice briefly.
TICE: Unlimited immigration in the last 15 years has depressed wages and that I don't think is in the interest of the British people.
STURGEON: First of all, there hasn't been unlimited immigration and it doesn't cut wages.
STURGEON: I don't want to see a cut in inward migration because it would damage the economy of my country and one of the reasons I want Scotland to be independent is so we can take these decisions for ourselves rather than having damaging decisions imposed upon us.
QUESTIONER_0: I'm sorry to wind it up.
QUESTIONER_0: I know there's a lot you could talk about.
QUESTIONER_0: We want to fit one more question in.
PRICE: Adam Price, very, very briefly.
PRICE: It's not migration that has depressed wages over the last 15 years.
PRICE: It's the austerity politics of your partners, the Conservative Party.
QUESTIONER_0: You're more than welcome to stay here for another hour and a half afterwards, but we haven't got time while we're on air, at least.
QUESTIONER_0: Let's move to our last question, and it comes from Trevor Morgan.
QUESTIONER_0: Where is Trevor Morgan?
QUESTIONER_8: Good evening.
QUESTIONER_8: Donald Trump has recently confirmed his visit to the UK.
QUESTIONER_8: If you had 30 seconds with him, what would you say?
QUESTIONER_0: And you have only got 30 seconds each to answer this, at the most.
QUESTIONER_0: Nicola Sturgeon?
LUCAS: Please stand down.
QUESTIONER_0: OK. Caroline Lucas, what would you say to Donald Trump?
LUCAS: I would say to him that look at the US states that are actually moving in the right direction on climate change.
LUCAS: It's good for the economy as well as good for the environment.
LUCAS: Get your act together and get back into the Paris Agreement.
QUESTIONER_0: Rishi Sunak?
QUESTIONER_0: Happy Thanksgiving.
QUESTIONER_0: Rebecca Long-Bailey?
LONG-BAILEY: I'm a good Catholic, so I won't say in public what I probably would say to him, but the most important point I'd make is about the climate emergency and how he needs to change his position.
LONG-BAILEY: There is a real climate emergency, and if we don't take action now, we're not going to leave a world or a future for our children.
TICE: Richard Tice.
TICE: Let's get a quick trade deal done.
STURGEON: And here's our NHS, is what he would say.
STURGEON: Oh, nonsense.
TICE: Stop this scandal.
TICE: It's pathetic.
TICE: Just lying to the British people continually.
STURGEON: It's pathetic.
STURGEON: I think you've got form on that.
PRICE: Adam Bright.
PRICE: Resign and take Boris with you.
SWINSON: Well I could congratulate him on getting his wish which was of course for him to have Boris Johnson and Nigel Farage come together but of course that's not going to be any good for our country so I would like to tell him that the British public still have the chance to stop him getting what he wants.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you very much indeed.
QUESTIONER_0: Let's move then to our closing statements.
QUESTIONER_0: Each speaker has got just 30 seconds, and as with the opening statements, the order was decided before tonight by the drawing of lots.
QUESTIONER_0: First, with her closing statement tonight, the Shadow Business Secretary, Labour's Rebecca Long-Bailey.
LONG-BAILEY: I want to thank everybody for watching tonight.
LONG-BAILEY: And it's easy to be cynical about politics.
LONG-BAILEY: But politics makes real change happen.
LONG-BAILEY: Labour made the NHS happen.
LONG-BAILEY: We made the minimum wage and Sure Start happen.
LONG-BAILEY: We'll make the Green Industrial Revolution happen.
LONG-BAILEY: A vote for Labour is a vote for hope.
LONG-BAILEY: For a government that supports you and invests in your community.
LONG-BAILEY: A government that is on your side.
LONG-BAILEY: So let's transform our country so that it works for everyone.
LONG-BAILEY: Vote Labour on the 12th of December.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you very much indeed.
QUESTIONER_0: And next, the First Minister of Scotland, Nicola Sturgeon, the leader of the SNP.
STURGEON: Boris Johnson's Tories are unfit for office, in my opinion.
STURGEON: But unless people vote to keep them out, we could be stuck with them and their policies for years to come, with dire consequences for our economy and public services, especially the NHS.
STURGEON: In Scotland, the SNP is the main challenger in every single Tory-held seat.
STURGEON: So I vote for the SNP on December the 12th as I vote to lock Boris Johnson out of Downing Street, provide an escape route from the mess of Brexit and to put Scotland's future into Scotland's hands so that we can build a better, fairer country.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you very much indeed.
QUESTIONER_0: Next to the leader of Plaid Cymru, Adam Price.
PRICE: On the 13th of December, my 84-year-old father may wake up for the 11th time in his life to a Tory government he, like the majority here, old miner that he is, has never voted for.
PRICE: He stopped voting Labour 2 some years ago because he realised that change will only ever come when Wales finds its voice.
PRICE: I really hope this is that moment for my father's generation, for my son's generation, for all our generations.
PRICE: Because it's when we find our voice that we will change this nation, that Wales will build a future that is better than our past.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you very much indeed.
QUESTIONER_0: Now to the leader of the Liberal Democrat Party, Jo Swinson.
SWINSON: As you sit on your sofa with your cup of tea, watching this election unfold, you might be thinking, surely we deserve better than this depressing duo of Boris Johnson and Jeremy Corbyn.
SWINSON: Boris Johnson, caught lying again and again.
SWINSON: He thinks the rules don't apply to him.
SWINSON: And frankly, he only cares about himself.
SWINSON: He doesn't deserve to win a majority and the Liberal Democrats can stop him.
SWINSON: You have the power to stop Brexit and create a brighter future.
SWINSON: Vote Liberal Democrat.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you.
QUESTIONER_0: For the Conservatives, the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, Rishi Sunak.
SUNAK: This is the choice you have.
SUNAK: Boris Johnson, delivering Brexit in weeks and focusing on the NHS, schools and police.
SUNAK: Or Jeremy Corbyn, ridiculously stuck in neutral on one of the biggest questions our country has ever faced.
SUNAK: Only the Conservatives can break this deadlock and set Britain free.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you very much indeed.
QUESTIONER_0: Now to the Chairman of the Brexit Party, Richard Tice.
TICE: Brexit done right is an amazing opportunity.
TICE: Let's go for it with ambition, with energy.
TICE: Lower prices, higher wages, training our own people, building roads and rail projects all over the country.
TICE: But make your vote count to get Brexit and stop Corbyn bankrupting the country.
TICE: Only the Brexit Party can take on Labour in seats Tories have not won in decades.
TICE: Together, let's change politics for good.
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you very much.
QUESTIONER_0: And finally tonight, Caroline Lucas of the Green Party.
LUCAS: This is the most important general election in generations.
LUCAS: The last chance to remain in the EU and transform Britain.
LUCAS: The very last chance to prevent runaway climate chaos.
LUCAS: A half of all voters say that climate breakdown will influence their choice on December the 12th.
LUCAS: Voting with them is the only way to get more Green MPs and to keep up the pressure.
LUCAS: So if you've ever thought about voting Green, do it.
LUCAS: If not now, when?
QUESTIONER_0: Thank you very much indeed.
QUESTIONER_0: And ladies and gentlemen, could you thank all the politicians from the seven parties that are here tonight?
